---
layout: post
title: "Review: Marx's Ecology"
date: 2016-07-01
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---
*Marx's Ecology: Materialism and Nature*, John Bellamy Foster, New York: Monthly
Review Press, 2000.

*Marx's Ecology* fills a gap in Marxist scholarship by, in a sense,
taking seriously Marx and Engels' claim to materialism. Reading 20th
century Marxists, it can sometimes seem as if "materialism" is being
used metaphorically, or at least has lost some of the precision it held
in the 19th century (the same can be said, of course, for "dialectic").
Bellamy recovers not only Marx's own interest in materialism, but the
history of materialist thought from the pre-Socratics and Epicurus,
through to the scientfic discoveries and displacement of
idealistic/religious views of the world ("natural theology") culminating
in the work of Darwin and others. Putting Marxism in this context not
only uncovers new depths to Marx's project, but it clarifies the sense
in which Marx and Engels always maintained that project to be
"scientific". Foster shows the extent to which Marx and Engels were
fully versed in the scientific theories and advances of their age. The
end result is not only fuller recognition of the place of ecology within
Marx's thinking, but a way to fit Marxism into thinking around ecology,
population, climate change, and other social/ecological problems we are
facing today.

The initial impetus for Marx's materialism was the reading of Epicurus,
especially as popularized by Lucretius in his *De rerum natura*, a
didactic poem in which he sets out and explains Epicurus' philosophy.
For Epicurus (as for Democritus), the world was composed of atoms which
interacted mechanically, those interactions producing everything that
exists in the physical world. In this schema, both "the gods" and
Platonic ideals have no place, and the teleological view of idealism is
surplus to requirements. Foster carefully links the areligious,
anti-teleological view of Epicurus with that of the early scientific
thinkers like Bacon and Newton, showing that the materialistic science
of the 17th and 18th centuries was, if anything, a vindication of the
theories of Epicurus and the pre-Socratics. By the early 19th century,
Epicurean philosophy was being recovered as an antidote to idealism,
just as his materialistic physics was an antidote to religiosity in
science. In 1841, Marx wrote his doctoral thesis on *The Difference
between the Democritean and the Epicurean Philosophy of Nature*, part of
a growing movement in Germany attempting to modify the idealism of Hegel
with materialist thought.

For Marx, Epicurus and Hegel stood at two poles of a very productive,
dialectical, relationship. Epicurus' materialism allowed Marx to reject
the idealism of Hegel while retaining Hegel's conception of dialectical
movement and totality. In this way, the logical and philosophical
foundations of Marxism were laid. But materialism did not only inform
Marx's philosophical views; the victory of materialist science in the
work of Huxley, Lyell, Tyndall, and especially Darwin, gave Marx the
scientific information required to firmly anchor the theory of
historical materialism and *Capital* within the scientific understanding
of his day. Indeed, Foster's book is perhaps at its most interesting in
uncovering the connections between Darwin's work and Marx's. It is no
coincidence that Darwin's *Origin of Species* (1859) appears at the time Marx
begins working on what will become *Capital* (1867). Darwin and Marx
were very near contemporaries, and this fact alone gives fresh insight
into the wider context of Marx's economic project, and the context in
which he worked. Marx is generally considered first and foremost a
political writer, his self-identification as an economist often played
down, and his view of his work as scientific generally dismissed. But by
connecting Marx's work with Darwin's, as well as the general development
of modern science in the mid-19th century, Foster recovers an aspect of
Marx which is generally ignored.

In all, *Marx's Ecology* is a fascinating book, making the connection
between science and (materialist) philosophy clear and providing
much-needed historical context not only for Marxism, but for the history
of ecological thought in and through advances in materialist thinking
and scientific discovery.
