---
layout: post
title: "Academic Labour, Governance, and the Strike"
date: 2016-11-04
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

As I write this, the [University of Manitoba Faculty
Association](http://www.umfa.ca/), which represents faculty members,
librarians, and other academic staff, is on day 4 of a strike. Today,
they are leading a [march](http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/university-manitoba-strike-picket-march-1.3836215) to the Administrative Offices of the University to demand improved working conditions and job security. After interference from the [Government of Manitoba](http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/interference-collective-bargaining-university-manitoba-1.3831126), UMFA has agreed to move forward with mediation on [non-salary issues](http://aeses.ca/picketing-message-umfa-president/).

In September, faculty and librarians at Long Island University's
Brooklyn Campus were [locked
out](http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2016/09/an-unprecedented-faculty-lockout/499016/)
for 12 days by their administration, who attempted to replace them with
scab labour, many of whom - being non-unionized - had no choice but to
comply. 

In June, library workers in Mississauga were on strike for [nearly
three
weeks](http://www.mississauga.com/news-story/6778885-mississauga-library-workers-strike-ends-after-tentative-deal-reached-all-18-city-branches-remain-c/).
Once you start looking, conflicts between administrators (whether
academic or municipal) and workers can be seen everywhere, all the time.
We may be past the historical period of mass industrial strikes and
lockouts (thought the threatened CUPW strike this summer argues
otherwise), but labour issues in librarianship simply show that the
class struggle is alive and well.

In January 2015, the Supreme Court found that a government interpreting
"essentially services" too broadly abrogated the constitutional [right to
strike](https://scc-csc.lexum.com/scc-csc/scc-csc/en/item/14610/index.do),
which (as I understand it) made the collective agreement between
University of Saskatchewan and its faculty members unconstitutional.
This has had an effect on all other non-union faculty associations in
Canada, association which are bound by provincial legislation **but
not** by the province's labour relations act (or its executive body, the
labour board). This is true in Alberta as well, where the government is
now trying to decide whether simply to modify the existing
Post-Secondary Learning Act to make it constitutional, or to take all
labour-related language out of the PSLA and make the academic
associations subject to the Alberta Labour Relations Act. The presidents
of the three largest universities in Alberta - Alberta, Calgary, and
Lethbridge - obviously want to continue under the PSLA rather than give
academic workers the protection of the labour board. James Turk of the
Canadian Association of University Teachers (which includes librarians)
wrote a
[letter](http://www.aasua.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/20161027TurktoAASUArePresidentsSubmission.pdf) to the AASUA (UAlberta's faculty association) in support
of the associations being recognized and covered by the labour relations
act. In the letter, Turk identifies several problems with the PSLA:

* It does not allow the membership to decide the structure of the
  organization
* It gives the employer sole power to determine who is and is not a
  member of the organization
* It has no statutory powers (e.g. to compel witnesses) in the case of
  disputes
* It includes no requirement to bargain in good faith
* It includes no requirement for fair representation by the association
  of a member
* It denies the right to strike

Now, the three presidents who submitted letters in support of the PSLA
to the province of Alberta used several arguments, but I want to talk
about one in particular: They argue that the labour relations act is
unnecessary for academic institutions because they are managed through
collegial governance. In this view, there is no conflict between
employer and employed, between administration and rank-and-file workers.
Partly this can be explained through the fact that the
Board-of-Governors and the Province are not private corporations, partly
due to the fact that much of a university's administration is composed
of (usually ex-) faculty members. Under the PSLA, academic staff members
remain in scope for the collective agreement even while bargaining on
the other side of the table. Move along, there can be no class struggle
here because our minds are on higher things, the summit of intellectual
achievement, and collective bargaining is simply a material blot on our
proverbial copybook, a necessary evil, but we're really all on the same
page.

This argument is patently absurd. And yet, the presidents double-down on
it by claiming that, by making the academic faculty associations subject
to the labour relations act, this will *cause* collegial governance to be
destroyed. So the argument runs: we have no conflict, but if you try to
protect yourselves, then we *will* have conflict. The argument used by
racketeers for generations.

I have written about collegial governance (or lack thereof) elsewhere.
We do not have collegial governance, so the argument that it will
somehow disappear if we become subject to the labour relations act is a
straw man.

But there is something more interesting I want to bring up here: the
question of ideology. Emily Drabinski, one of the librarians heavily
involved in union organizing at LIU, wrote recently about [her experience](http://crln.acrl.org/content/77/10/488.full) on
the board of *Radical Teeacher*, beginning in 2008. At one point, she
writes:

>Managing an explicitly radical journal like *Radical Teacher*, the
>editors might have been expected to understand scholarship as a
>material practice. For Marxists, life is produced and reproduced
>through material conditions. Under capitalism, factors such as surplus
>labor and the demand for profit constrain these conditions—factors that
>also play into scholarly publishing as librarians experience it. When
>the board members didn’t see their labor as such, I felt I should
>intervene, in order to articulate some of these practices. As a
>librarian, I understood and was able to explain to the other board
>members why people weren’t buying our journal.

And again:

>Taking Radical Teacher open access meant working with scholars until
>they understood that scholarship requires work beyond the realm of
>ideas. Even though the Marxist materialists on the board understood on
>some level that people made the journal with their hands, it was harder
>for them to see that we were part of a bigger economic structure.

This last part strikes me as strange because seeing the bigger pictures
is, in my view, one of the foundational ideas of Marxism. One of the
best discussions of Marxism and "the totality" is in Georg Lukacs'
*History and Class Consciousness*, but is a hallmark of most Marxist
writers, especially those writing after the Western Marxist "return to Hegel" of the 1920s and 30s.

*If* the presidents of Alberta, Calgary, and Lethbridge are in good
faith (though the PSLA, of course, does not require good faith), then
the absurdity of the collegial governance argument can only seem
convincing to them if they are unable to understand a) "scholarship as a
material practice" and b) that they (and we) are part of a larger
economic structure in which struggle between those who own the means of
production and those who do not is guaranteed and a first-principle. I
do not think they are speaking in good faith, neither do I think they
are ideologically naive. I think the know full well they are arguing for
the maintenance of a system that - in the ongoing class struggle -
benefits them and the economic, social, and political structures of
capitalism.

The fight keeps going on, as we can see right now at the University of
Manitoba. Maybe next week it will be Saskatchewan's turn, the week after
that Edmonton Public Library or University of Victoria. If nothing else,
worker solidarity requires that we recognize that while the location of
the struggle may change, the identity of those on either side do not
change. As Marx put it in the *Communist Manifesto* more than 150 years
ago, the workers have nothing to lose but their chains; they have a
world to win.

I see that this blog post is long enough already. I have some thoughts
about the right to strike, but those will have to wait for a part two...

*It should go without saying that I support the University of Manitoba
Faculty Association in their ongoing strike.*
