---
layout: post
title:  "Organizational Structure and 'Democratic Centralism'"
date:   2016-05-02
categories: introduction
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

I would like to propose a thought-experiment. Rather than the top-down,
centralized library – either academic or public – in which decisions are
made by a funding organization and implemented by library workers
responsible, ultimately, to a chief librarian; what if rather than this
organizational structure, libraries were organized instead on a
federated model of self-organizing units, coming together in larger
committees as appropriate in order to fulfill the mandate of the library
and perform the work required of library workers in a state of full
transparency and collegial, bottom-up, decision-making.

The term “democratic centralism” is a vexed one. On the one hand it refers to strict party
discipline in which discussion among party members shall be free and
unfettered before a decision has been taken, while all members are
expected to abide by the party’s decision once the decision has been
made. 

>Lenin’s vision… was of a Party built from below upwards with the higher
>organs deriving their powers from, and directly accountable to, the
>lower ones. There could, in this organisational framework, be no
>question of the Central Committee or Central Organ issuing irrefragable
>directions. Always and at all times democratic centralism, in Lenin’s
>conception at this time, entailed the right of dissent: it ‘implies
>universal and full *freedom to criticise*, so long as this does not
>disturb the unity *of a definite action*’. (Neil Harding, *Lenin’s
>Political Thought*, v. 1, 232).

On the other hand, Harding shows that Lenin’s focus changed during
and after the first world war and the revolutions of 1917, moving from
questions of party structure and discipline to a more European outlook
and investigation into the structure of finance capitalism and the state
  
>For good reason therefore Lenin, during this period, never applied his
>idea of democratic centralism to the Party – the Party was seldom
>mentioned in his writings at this time. The idea was, rather, applied
>to the relations between the multiform communes which the revolution
>had thrown up and the voluntary federation of different national
>groupings. Always it insisted upon the utmost local independence or
>autonomy and the widest possible variety of the forms of
>self-administration. (v. 2, 178)

Following Marx, Harding argues, Lenin’s view of the socialist state went
from the massive centralization of Imperialism to a federation of small
communes based on the Paris Commune and the Soviets, which arose in St
Petersburg and Moscow in 1905 and 1917.  Lenin’s view of democratic
centralism at this time was based on the democratic Soviets coming
together voluntarily in centralized organizations where necessary and
appropriate.

>In this guise the whole pattern of what was later to be called
>democratic centralism is quite inverted. Initiative clearly rests with
>the local communes, their agreement to pursue common goals is
>voluntary, the centre must never impose its will on the localities for,
>as we have seen, the vitality of the socialist project, indeed its
>whole viability, rests upon the widest variety, the broadest
>experimentation with differing forms of self-administration. The role
>of the central administration is merely to help clear the path of mass
>creativity of the obstacles it encounters. (v 2., 173).

What Lenin is proposing here is nothing short of the abolition of the
centralized national state that (in Europe) developed out of the
collapse of the Roman empire and the struggles of empires of the middle
ages, and were made inviolable in the treaties backed by military power
of the 18th and 19th centuries, and had reached what Lenin considered
its highest form in the Imperialist states in the period leading up to
the first world war. Instead of centralized administration and influence
and power flowing down from the top, Lenin envisaged a voluntary
federation of self-organizing communes coming together at higher and
higher levels as necessary in order to accomplish the tasks that
required that level of organization. 

Library organizational structures, like most organizational structures,
mirror the structure and power flows of the capitalist state, only they
tend to do so without even the lip-service paid to democracy through the
mechanism of elections. In some libraries, collegial governance provides
a countervailing force resisting centralized, top-down, decision making,
but as [Revitt and Luyk](http://www.cjal.ca/index.php/capal/article/view/24307) have shown, collegial governance, even where it exists, tends to be variably and imperfectly applied.

>A review of the nearly 40-year history of library councils in Canadian
>academic libraries suggests that the collegial governance model
>endorsed by CAUT is perhaps something for academic libraries to aspire
>to, rather than something that is currently experienced.

In public libraries, of course, anything like collegial governance is
not even on the agenda.

While individual librarians in administrative or managerial positions
may try to foster and support decision-making coming up from the
rank-and-file, fundamentally the decisions of the university
administration, provost, and chief librarian, tend to be made with
little or no consultation or transparency. Chief librarians, whether in
academic or public libraries, are responsible to their boards for
implementing certain kinds of decisions and programmes.

To return to the thought-experiment, then: can we envisage an
organizational structure among libraries which implements Lenin’s later
vision of democratic centralism. What if library units (branches,
departments) had no unit head, but organized themselves in order to
accomplish the work that needs to be done. How, then, is the work to be
done decided on? Imagine, then, that these self-organizing, autonomous
units came together in order to decide precisely those questions. The
library workers who attend these multi-unit committees would be elected
and given the responsibility for representing the views of the units and
committing the unit to accomplishing the work decided on at this central
level. The important thing in this thought experiment is this: that the
units themselves are self-organizing and democratic, and that such
central committees that come into being arise out of the voluntary
association of units with a shared understanding of the work they are
there to do. In this form of organization, then, a library worker might
be similarly elected to represent the library to the provost, or city
council, or whichever larger organization funds the library. This
library worker, like all committee delegates, could be democratically
recalled.

The “human nature” argument will no doubt be raised here; that human
beings are inherently lazy and hence some will work more than others in
these self-governing communal units; that human beings “just aren’t like
that”. I could respond to this criticism theoretically or through
historical justification. But it is simpler to remind critics of
something else Lenin said (quoting St Paul):  “he who does not work, does not eat”, which sounds
harsh, but simply removes the mystification of human labour under
capitalism and openly reiterates an eternal truth of human life.

I am not proposing this democratic-centralist model as something we
could feasibly implement in the short-term, or perhaps at all under the
current mode of production, but I think that bearing alternative models
of social organization in mind can be useful as we face up to problems,
big or small, in our current organizational structures.
