---
layout: post
title: "Librarianship: Values and Profession"
date: 2016-07-22
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

I've been thinking quite a lot lately about the presumed values of our
presumed profession. "Presumed" in this case both in the sense that we
presume we agree on meanings (of the words we use to describe our
values, for example) and in the sense that a profession of librarianship
is presumed to exist. This double presumption, it seems to me, is
difficult to support, in part because the two presumptions feed into
each other ("what do we mean by *profession*?") and in part because our
presumptions serve to mystify real relationships among people, and
between people and the world.

<a href="https://twitter.com/anarchivist">Mark Matienzo</a> of DPLA
wrote a post a couple of weeks ago on <a
href="https://dp.la/info/2016/07/05/dpla-tech-team-core-values/">The
DPLA Technology Team Core Values</a>. I was initially struck by how
concrete each of the core value areas was. Each area was not only fairly
specific ("Maximal openness to DPLA technology and infrastructure") but
each was accompanied by a statement adding clarification or context
("Maximal openness to DPLA technology and infrastructure, through use of
minimally restrictive open source or reuse-friendly licenses for
software, documentation, and related assets"). After some discussion on
Twitter, I threw out the idea that perhaps our (= libraries' or
librarianship's) values should have to conform to the SMART principles.
These are criteria which, in project management, are required for the
definition of a goal. A goal must be

* Specific,
* Measurable,
* Achievable,
* Realistic, and
* Time-bound

Perhaps not all of these apply to values as opposed to goals, but some
of them are, I would argue, crucial. If we aren't specific and can't
measure achievement of our values, how do we know that we actually
exemplify them? A good example of library values which are to all
intents and purposes meaningless, context free buzzwords, the <a href="https://library.ualberta.ca/about-us/vision/">University
of Alberta Libraries principles and values are as follows</a>:

**Principles**

* Accountable
* Open
* Responsive
* Sustainable
* Transparent

**Values**

* Collaboration
* Inclusivity
* Innovation
* Intellectual Freedom
* Service

That's it. No attempt to clarify or define these terms. No links to
examples. No sense as to how they might be measured. How do we know if
we exemplify any of these principles or values? Absent specificity, this
becomes the prerogative of whoever controls the discourse. In fact, it
becomes subjet to the power hierarchy within the library itself.

At around the same time I discovered a "bucket list" for land
reclamation professionals:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-partner="tweetdeck"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">Wouldn&#39;t this be neat for librarianship. Not likely tho.
<a
href="https://t.co/R7qfaMwmgP">pic.twitter.com/R7qfaMwmgP</a></p>&mdash;
красный библиотекарь (@redlibrarian) <a
href="https://twitter.com/redlibrarian/status/755803579630268416">July
20, 2016</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"
charset="utf-8"></script>

Again, this led to some discussion around whether or not librarians
could achieve consensus on such a list for our profession. I argued that
whether or not we could achieve such a consensus, it's almost a moot
point because we have no forum through which to discuss these things. In
Canada, we don't have a professional association with the size and reach
of the American Library Association (and this was true even before the
dissolution of the CLA). Small constituencies (like Library Twitter, the CARL Directors, or CAPAL members) might have a way to discuss these issues, but for the most part librarians are stuck within their organizations and institutions which may or may not foster critical discussion (in my experience, the latter predominates).

Other professions have centralized consensus in the form of their
licensing bodies: teachers, doctors, and lawyers all have specific and
measurable values to which they must adhere. It has been pointed outmany
times before that, by that criteria, librarianship is not a profession
at all.

And yet, there *is* something common to the outlook of most library
workers I know. Something on the level of an orientation or a worldview
that perhaps cannot be captured by anything so prosaic as a mission,
vision, or values statement. This is why we argue so vociferously about
a lot of this stuff, even though we recognize that it's unlikely to do
any good.

Finally, in a Twitter discussion with <a
href="https://twitter.com/pabinkley">Peter Binkley</a> I proposed the
idea that perhaps, given that libraries are no longer about books, we
could agree that we should promote reading. I argued that there was a
possibility, a case to be made, that reading is a qualitatively distinct
activity from other "media consumption" promoted by postmodern
capitalism. I'm not necessarily wedded to that idea, but I think it's a
conversation worth having. In the end, I settled for the idea that it
would be nice if libraries could stand for something, anything, since at
present it seems that we are simply reacting, silently and by default
supporting the neoliberal and corporate order (albeit in different ways
according to whether an institution is academic or public). It seems to
me that there is very little (read: none) critical thought that goes
into the provision of services. Most of these decisions are made either
by the chief librarian or the small group of senior librarians with
little or no input or debate. At the same time, the default line in many
contexts (presentations, publications) is the success and leadership of
libraries and their services. "We done good" is the refrain. This, I
think, is what drives so many of us to be critical - of the values that
we proclaim we hold, of the principles to which we claim to adhere -
because there is no shortage of people uncritically proclaiming the
universal value and goodness of the library that never fails.

A good example is with "intellectual freedom", something that we all -
in principle - support. But like many library values, it is seen more in
a negative than a positive context. Intellectual freedom is often
reduced to "you can't tell me what to think" rather than an active
"here's what I think". Intellectual freedom is seen as a right, when it
ought to be seen as a responsibility. As a result, it is honoured more
in the breach than the observance, as fear of losing funding or - to
quote The Wire - suction with funding bodies (municipalities of
university governors). If we are so afraid that "saying something wrong"
will jeopardized our standing with our funding agencies, then
intellectual freedom falls at the first hurdle. As a core value of our
profession, if intellectual freedom falls, where then can our profession
locate itself?

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-partner="tweetdeck"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">If academic and public libraries are afraid of offending their
funders, whither our intellectual/professional freedom?</p>&mdash;
красный библиотекарь (@redlibrarian) <a
href="https://twitter.com/redlibrarian/status/756249266595647488">July
21, 2016</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"
charset="utf-8"></script>

In this recently published book *An American Utopia: Dual Power and the
Universal Army*, Fredric Jameson argues that political parties on left
have lost any ability they might have had to wield any kind of power,
officially or unofficially. These parties might, he suggests, be
rehabilitated, but without expecting anything concrete from them. Their
purpose would then be to resuscitate ideas and words which, with the
victory of neoliberalism and *The End of History* are considered quaint
and old-fashioned. The role of political parties in the kind of utopia
Jameson envisions, is to "talk socialism", "to breathe life back into
the slogans withered and desiccated by the triumphant poison gas of Mrs.
Thatcher's breath" (7).

> It should be understood that under the current system of
> representative government, the political parties can never accomplish
> [any concrete programme], but they can talk about them, they can make
> them thinkable and conceivable once again, they can plant the seeds
> and rekindle the possibility of imagining future praxis - and they can
> reestablish these themes in their legitimate place in the public
> sphere. (8)

Not only do I think that libraries - especially, but not exclusively
public libraries - have a similar role to play in society to Jameson's
political parties, but I think we as librarians also have a
responsibility to make real, concrete, values thinkable again. In a
profession where the single word "responsive" can be proposed as a
principle with a straight-face, where our services are all tainted by
our forced complicity with capitalist economics and politics, perhaps
utopian thinking, silly proposals, unworkable schemes, arguments,
curses, dangerous ideas, in a word, criticism, are vital to
give the sapling worldview of librarians - that fragile, ill-defined
thing - room to grow.
