---
layout: post
title: "Gramsci and Library Neutrality"
date: 2016-12-04
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

This Friday, I was interviewed along with University of Alberta School
of Library and Information Studies professor Michael McNally on the CJSR
radio show ["Shout for
Libraries"](http://www.cjsr.com/shows/shout-for-libraries/). We were interviewed by Celine
Gareau-Brennan and Lorisia Macleod, two SLIS students. We began by
discussing the age-old question of library neutrality. Neither Michael
nor I support the idea of library neutrality and, while I have met
rank-and-file librarians who hold this position, I find it mostly part
of the discourse and value system of library administrators. When
Michael and I were asked why we think the idea of library neutrality
continues to be so strongly held, we mentioned things like reification
of social relations and hegemony. But the question made me start wanting
to dig a little deeper into this: why has library neutrality continued
to be a bone of contention ever since at least the 1970s debates around
social responsibility and professionalism, if not before.

At the same time, I kept thinking about the
[lecture](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2016/11/21/slis-lecture.html) I gave a few weeks
ago in SLIS about librarians' complicity within the state structure, our
role in maintaining the hegemony of the capitalist class. I realized -
prompted by Michael's recommendation to Shout listeners that they read
Gramsci's prison diaries - that I hadn't mentioned Gramsci once in the
entire lecture, despite his ideas about hegemony and intellectuals being
a core part of that lecture's argument.

I think these ideas - around the non-neutrality of libraries, hegemony,
and the role of intellectuals - are are part of a single coherent theory
in Gramsci, where I've taken them apart and tried to discuss them
separately (a failure of dialectics!). This blog post goes some way to
bring these ideas back into a single frame.

In his analysis of the intellectual classes in Italy in the early 20th
century, Gramsci identifies two main types - there are organic
intellectuals, who arise out of and accompany a given social class as
its position in society changes, and there are traditional
intellectuals, whose positions are historical; social classes find these
intellectuals "always already" existing on the social scene. Organic
intellectuals tend to be specific to the mode of production, so
industrial engineers, for example, along with other industrial
technicians, are the organic intellectuals of capitalism (i.e. they
developed alongside the bourgeoisie, and help to maintain and reproduce
bourgeois culture and ideology).

The classic example of a traditional intellectual is the priest: the
church has existed for millennia, and across many changes of society,
class, and mode of production. The rising class "takes command" of
traditional intellectual organizations in order to use the social
capital, the social power of the organization to further the goals of
the rising class. Despite the fact that public - and even academic -
libraries don't have the lineage and prestige the church holds, I would
argue that librarians belong to this class of traditional
intellectuals. (I don't think this is too big a stretch; Gramsci himself
includes schools as a mechanism for producting intellectuals.)

The social purpose of intellectuals, according to Gramsci, is to promote
and reproduce the ideology, and thus the hegemony, of the ruling class.
Organic intellectuals arise along with the ruling class, but the realm
of traditional intellectuals must be "conquered":

>One of the most important characteristics of any group that is
>developing towards dominance is its struggle to assimilate and to
>conquer "ideologically" the traditional intellectuals, but this
>assimilation and conquest is made quicker and more efficacious the more
>the group in question succeeds in simultaneously elaborating its own
>organic intellectuals. (Gramsci, *Selections from the Prison
>Notebooks*, 10).

Elsewhere, I've connected the changing form of the academic and public
library with phases of the rise of the bourgeoisie *in the form of the
state*. The liberal state required different things from the library than
the welfare or neoliberal state. My argument in that case is more
top-down rather than woven through the fortunes of the bourgeoisie. In
Gramsci's view, intellectual work begins prior to, and proceeds
independently of, the conquest of state power. It is a function, in his
terminology, of civil society just as much as political society.

How does this fit into the idea of library neutrality, and then into my
proposal that librarians are in fact complicit with capitalist state
power, the maintenance of hegemony, and the reproduction of ideology?
Gramsci points out that, with respect to traditional intellectuals,
whose institutions have long and storied histories,

>since these various categories of traditional intellectuals experience
>through an "esprit de corps" [i.e. a profession] their uninterrupted
>historical continuity and their special qualification [i.e. the MLIS],
>they thus put themselves forward as autonomous and independent of the
>dominant social group [i.e. as neutral]. This self-assessment is not
>without consequences in the ideological and political field,
>consequences of wide-ranging impact. The whole of idealist philosophy
>can easily be connected with this position assumed by the social cmplex
>of intellectuals and be defined as the expression of that social utopia
>by which the intellectuals think of themselves as "independent",
>autonomous, endowed with a character of their own, etc." (SPN, 8).

In other words, hegemony is only possible if the class-nature of
ideological reproduction remains hidden. And since intellectuals owe
their position in society (prestige, etc), precisely to the power of the
ruling class, it follows logically that the mystification, the obscuring
of the class relationship between intellectuals and the ruling class
must be maintained. In librarianship, as in other professions and
classes of intellectuals, this is achieved by an insistence on
"neutrality". Intellectuals play an integral role in the conquest and
maintenance of power by the ruling class. For Gramsci, civil society and
political society (the state)

>correspond on the one hand to the function of "hegemony" which the
>dominant group exercises throughout society and on the other hand to
>that of "direct domination" or command exercised through the state and
>"juridical" government. The functions in question are precisely
>organizational and connective. The intellectuals are the dominant
>group's "deputies" exercising the subaltern functions of social
>hegemony and political government. (SPN, 12)

In order to combat the dominance of capitalist ideology, library workers
must be open and up-front about our orientation. We have to engage in
"discursive battle" with every expression of bourgeois (capitalist,
neoliberal) ideology. At the same time, we must be careful that we
aren't simply reproducing capitalist hegemony with a new face. And that,
I think, is the trickiest part.

I'm not sure why Gramsci was absent from my SLIS lecture. Perhaps there
was something Freudian in it. Perhaps, on the other hand, there is
something here similar to Foucault's use of Marx: "I quote Marx without
saying so, without quotation marks [so] I am thought to be someone who
doesn't quote Marx" (Foucault, *Power/Knowlege*, 52)


