---
layout: post
title: "#critlib and code4lib"
date: 2017-03-10
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Before getting down to it, I recommend watching the stream of Christina
Harlow's c4l2017 keynote ["Resistance is Fertile: Building a Manualfesto
for LibTech"](https://youtu.be/xRuPShYelm4?t=42m37s). Go, do it now. While you're
there, check out the rest of the c4l2017 talks too.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-partner="tweetdeck"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">It makes me sad that the <a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/critlib?src=hash">#critlib</a> tribe
pays no mind to the good work at and of <a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/c4lib17?src=hash">#c4lib17</a></p>&mdash;
LIS Grievances (@lis_grievances) <a
href="https://twitter.com/lis_grievances/status/840225740092239872">March
10, 2017</a></blockquote>

The 2017 Code4Lib conference ended yesterday with a stirring keynote
from Christina Harlow. The tweet above appeared this morning on the
ever-provocative anonymous LIS_grievances bot. There are a few things
I'd like to unpack about this tweet, one of which is the idea that
there's a #critlib tribe. I have a chapter forthcoming in a book called
*The Politics of Theory and the Practice of Critical Librarianship*
which I suppose makes me a member of this so-called tribe...? 

(As an aside, the notion of a critlib tribe reminds of of this other
recent LIS_grievance: 

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-partner="tweetdeck"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr"><a
href="https://twitter.com/hashtag/critlib?src=hash">#critlib</a> and the
SJW wing of librarianship.</p>&mdash; LIS Grievances (@lis_grievances)
<a
href="https://twitter.com/lis_grievances/status/837366902578114562">March
2, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"
charset="utf-8"></script>

This unfortunately connects critlib with the narrative of, for example,
Gamergate, Men's Right's Activists, and other deluded components of the
"alt-right", for whom anyone who suggests that what they personally want isn't of
primary concern must be a rabid "social justice warrior".)

Within librarianship, then, I'm concerned about the idea that anyone who
engages in critical theory must be a member of a "tribe", but even more
worrying is the idea that there is a constituency out there who
positions themselves on some kind of "alt-right of librarianship"
looking to dogwhistle others of their ilk by equating critlib with the
(perceived) SJW menace.

The other assumption made in the first LIS_grievances tweet is that the
"critlib tribe" (whatever that is) and the code4lib community are
mutually exclusive. This is demonstrably false, even if we take for the
sake of argument the idea of a critlib tribe. There are code4lib
attendees who actively engage in critical theory and vice versa. And
just as the code4lib community is not monolithic or well-defined - and
that's how we like it - neither is the critlib community.

Code4LibYEG, which I helped to found in 2013, takes pride in its
inclusiveness, while still recognizing that we have a long way to go.
Our events include participants from all sectors of librarianship active
in Edmonton, and we have strong participation among some
under-represented groups within technology, primarily women. We don't do
so well on race, possibly because of the lack of diversity within the
wider Edmonton population. And, in my opinion, we don't do very well
among non-professional staff (e.g. library technicians). We would like
to improve on these fronts. Code4LibYEG, like the wider code4lib
community, has just enough structure to be a viable group. At one of our
recent meetings, the "anarchist" nature of Code4LibYEG was discussed -
and while I would necessarily go that far, it's an interesting idea.

So, I'm both part of the critlib and code4lib communities, however those
are defined. But the first LIS_grievances tweet was decrying a lack of
engagement between the "critlib tribe" and the code4lib conference. So,
taking Christina's closing keynote to stand for the code4lib conference
for the sake of space and argument, let's engage.

[Caveat: there's no way I can do justice to everything Christina talks
about in this keynote, so I reiterate the importance of watching her
talk.]

What struck me most about Christina's talk was how she more-or-less led
with a very critlib statement:

> we are in a highly polarized and dangerous political climate. White
> supremacy groups are more active - or perhaps, simply more visibly
> active in the public eye; bias incidents are up in our communities;
> black, brown, and trans people are being murdered; Muslims are stopped
> from returning to their homes; journalism and truth is being blocked.
> (...) This is not a time for status quo, this is not a time for our silence
>on these questions. (All quotations taken from Christina's [speaker
>notes](bit.ly/c4l17harlow ))

This is precisely the attitude that the Social Responsibility Round
Table takes with respect to the ALA (for example, the contentious issue
around the ALA making a statement against the Gulf War in 1991), the
Progressive Librarian Guild stands by, and would not be out of place in
any critlib discussion. 

> I earnestly think we don’t know what we believe until we see what we
> do. (...) So, how do we make our ethics and politics apparent in our daily
> actions? Especially if we don’t work in some explicitly political or
> ethical space? How do we “walk the walk”?

To me, this is exactly the space in which critical librarianship
operates. Knowing what our ethics and politics are requires critical
reflection (with a very broad definition of what that is) *especially*
since our spaces are - or pretend they are - not explicitly political or
ethical. It would be hard enough to act ethically/politically in a space
that supported such a stance, but in librarianship, as in many other
fields, we have to *also* expend energy fighting to open up such space
for practice. And Christina is absolutely right that a focus on
technolog(y|ies) is not the answer. As I've written before about the
stifling effect of too much process, the idea that reaching for the next
technology will be the silver bullet for all our (ethical, poltical)
problems is ridiculous. 

>I’d present that our data technologies and our seeming incompetence on
>the whole to implement them in any wholesale, meaningful, or
>ecosystem-aware fashion, highlights shifts happening not in how we
>define data, but in how define professional relationships, our
>skillsets, our power hierarchies, our interactions with ourselves and
>with systems.

The question this raises in Christina's talk is precisely how we can
actually go about making concrete change in the world, how can we
connect abstract theories about things to practice and action.

>The “making it work” spirit is another important aspect of code4lib for
>me. We want to get stuff done, and iterate, and experiment, and tinker,
>and build, and maintain - not just theorize, plan, or idealize.

> I see every action I do, from spreadsheets to Git repositories to
> staff meetings to workshops to documentation, as political - not in
> terms of Republican or Democrat, but as a chance to be anti-fascist,
> to be inclusive, to be open, to be working towards an evolving, shared
> vision of a community. Each datum is a chance for meaningful action,
> in my view, in everyday work.

I really appreciated Christina's enumeration of the cultures and
movements that have informed her (Riot Grrrl and Queercore), because we
all do take different routes to get where we are. My own experience was
shaped largely by frustration at working on a post-Fordist call-centre
assembly-line from ages 18-23, as well as anger and resentment of the
university where I was intent on not being indoctrinated. Christina's
point that it's important to "[take] discontent based off of a number
of reasons and [make] into a work ethics and an aesthetic" is crucial
and often overlooked.

Christina goes on to discuss three areas which, to my mind, serve to
expose the false dichotomy between theory and practice. The first area -
"seeing our work outputs as tied into our politics and ethics" -
precisely identifies the unity of theory and practice. Of course we need
to raise our head above the theoretical weeds and engage in practice,
but these aren't mutually exclusive, independent operations. Theory and
practice are entwined and engaged with each other. As an example of this
Christina cites the amazing work being done by for example, the [Library
Freedom Project](libraryfreedomproject.org), and also calls attention to
the importance of InfoSec (information security, broadly covering all
aspects of electronic surveillance and the protection of privacy).

Christina's next area - "I believe transparency and openness all circles
around the idea of open organizing of our communities as well as
rethinking our power structures and dynamics" - posits a democratic hope
for library technology communities, one that both Code4Lib and Access
are often confronting and debating. Recognizing how we fail in these
areas is vitally important in order to improve, but we can only usefully
fail if we do it openly and transparently. But Christina rightfully
critiques our own unconscious bias in favour of closed vs. open.

>Openness for our information systems -- in whichever way that manifests
> -- is again, going against a bias that we know better than others what
>the work is about or how to manage it. It is a community issue as much
>as a day to day work issue - how often do you see closed processes,
>tools, events even between our working areas within a library?

There isn't enough space here to engage with Christina's ideas at the
level that they merit. [Have I said you should watch the video of the keynote
yourself](https://youtu.be/xRuPShYelm4?t=42m37s). There is so much more
in Christina's talk than I can even remotely do justice to here. Needless to say,
Christina's ideas are informed not only by Riot Grrrl and Queercore
culture, but also by her experience within the profession and her deep,
deep technical understanding of metadata, systems, and software
development. This keynote was rightly making a huge impression on
Twitter while it was being given (and afterwards) and it contains a huge
amount of information that deserves to be deeply engaged with not only
by members of the code4lib, Access, and critlib communities, but
librarians in all fields. Christina closes her keynote with a call to
arms that aren't out of character for code4lib and, I hope, it resonates
with members of many "tribes".

>And whether or not you care about this idea of the library data
>technology manualfesto, I hope some of these points lands for you too.
>Riot grrrl or no, metadataist or developer, librarian or
>administration, you do you, and lets aim for engagement so we can head
>for shared, intersectional, engaged work based on our community’s goals,
>ethics, politics and wishes.

The idea that critlib isn't engaging with c4l17 is, to me, absurd on its
face: I consider many of the code4lib talks, and Christina's keynote in
particular, *to be critlib*. Nothing is gained by drawing arbitrary
borders around permeable communities.
