---
layout: post
title: Ursula Franklin, The Real World of Technology
date: 2017-05-14
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Ursula Franklin, *The Real World of Technology* (Toronto: House of
Anansi, 1999)

The title of Franklin's 1987 Massey Lectures are an homage to C.B.
Macpherson's 1964 Lectures, *The Real World of Democracy*. Macpherson
saw the Soviet and Post-Colonial states of the mid-sixties as
challengers to the Western Liberal Democracy to which he was committed:

>We in the West have built up a system which we value very highly. It
>combines a large measure of individual liberty with a fair
>approximation to majority rule. None of the other systems have managed
>this, and we don't indtend to be talked out of our achievement no
>matter how necessary a policy of co-existence with the other systems
>might be. (C.B. Macpherson, *The Real World of Democracy*, Toronto:
>Anansi, 2006, p. 4)

This point of view should be familiar these days: it's the stubborn cry of
liberals long-accustomed to the unquestioned supremacy (hegemony) of
their values seeing those values attacked by subaltern activists
under the banner, not of pluralism, but of equality. It is the cry of
antediluvian liberal democrats arguing against "identity politics",
"cultural Marxism", and relativism of all colours. Jordan Peterson is a
good example of this, but examples are not hard to come by. The hegemony of
the liberal ideology, which was so total as to seem like not an ideology
at all, "neutral", "value free", is crumbling in the face of competing
interests. Liberals call out for a renewal of the social contract,
falling back on "fraternity" when the traditional call for "liberty" has
failed.

Franklin's work calls back to Macpherson's in many ways, but especially
in this defense of liberal values. It colours Franklin's view of "the
real world" in ways I'm not sure she was aware of. Nonetheless, her
diagnosis of the effect technological change has had on our lives is
succinct and potent. She's not *wrong*, but in addition to being a
liberal, she is also a positivist, and shares the positivist's bias for
"explaining that" over "explaining why". Franklin's book explains *that*
certain technological and social changes have occurred since the late
1970s, but it can't explain *why*.

Fundamentally, this is because - while claiming that nothing she writes
should be taken as technological determinism - Franklin is in fact a
technological determinist.

>Nothing in my survey or its highlights should be interpreted as
>technological determinism or as a belief in the autonomy of technology
>per se. What needs to be emphasised is that technologies are developed
>and used within a particular social, economic, and political context.
>(51)

And yet, on almost every page, technology takes an ontological priority
over the social. Nothing is written about the social, economic, and
political context in which Franklin understands technology to arise. For
example she writes that “technology as practice has modified our
culture” (26), “[the speed of communications technologies] so completely
changed the real world of technology that we now live in a world that is
fundamentally different” (34), “new technical means restructure social
and economic activities” (41). While technology is seen as “modifying”
and “restructuring” our society, this is not due to any internal logic
of the socio-economic system itself, but only to “inadequate modeling”
(21) and a failure of the social contract. It is this liberalism – of
social contract theory and morality (“was it morally right that, in the
name of trade, prosperity, and efficiency, the mode of work could change
so drastically that many people became uprooted and deprived of their
livelihood?” (58)) – that makes Franklin unable to understand, for
example, the nature and cause of technological innovation, which in her
view, simply happens:

>Inventions and innovations may lead to the development of a particular
>technology; this, in turn, can bring growth of the technology, social
>acceptance, and standardization of production as well as products. (92)

But what caused the inventions and innovations in the first place? Well,
if inventions and innovations are technologies, then clearly they too
were caused by inventions and innovations.

To my mind, this is due partly to the hegemonic nature of liberalism -
the fact that liberalism is so dominant, so supreme, that it cannot see
beyond its priorizing of individualism and the social contract. But it's
also due to the idea that neoliberal capitalism - the state of affairs
Franklin is criticizing - is a deformation of the "good capitalism" of
the long boom (the post-War Keynesian Welfare State period) and of
classic liberalism. Capitalism, like liberalism itself, is seen as
"rational" and "neutral", a fact of life; therefore the problems of
austerity and the cutting of social services (and all the other
"deformations" of neoliberalism) can't be due to the mode of production;
they have to be ascribed to something else. For Franklin, this opens the
door to seeing technology as some kind of objective agent, a *thing* in
the world that is operating in some kind of causal relationship with us.
If we have allowed this to happen, this is due - not to the logic and
power relations inherent in the system - but to a failure of governance
and the social contract. We have made mistakes, and "technology" has
profited by those mistakes.

This is a classic example of what Marx called *fetishism* and Lukacs
called *reification*, where the movement and dynamics of social
relationships are mistaken for the movements and agency of *things*. The
social consequences Franklin analyzes are definitely real, and problems
we have to address, but the days of an unquestioned liberalism, of the
free market, individualism, and the social contract, are over. Which all
to the good, since it is precisely that liberalism which prevents
Franklin from really getting to the heart of *The Real World of
Technology*, and leaves the reader of these lectures fundamentally
dissatisfied.
