---
layout: post
title: The Dialectic of Library Values
date: 2017-07-13
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

The dialectic that Marx adapted from Hegel sees the world as categories
which are constantly changing, dependent on history and the way in which
they interact with other categories. Human perception can only "grasp"
these categories at specific moments in time, freezing them and seeing
only particular aspects of them rather than the whole. It is as if the
a film was stopped so that we can see a single frame, but we lose the
entire context provided by motion and the persistence of vision. What is
important in the movement of dialectical categories is the
contradictions that they hide when we freeze them momentarily. It is
contradiction that makes the categories change over time, but since we
are only able to see them, grasp them conceptually, at a particular
moment, the contradictions are hidden from view.

For Marx, these categories were concrete: money, for example, or
commodities. Indeed, the opening chapters of *Capital* concerning the
commodities are an unpacking of the contradictions inherent in what
seems like a simple concept, the contradiction between use-value and
exchange-value that gives the commodity its dynamism. For Marx, the
contradictions significant to the category are social, and so the
category becomes representative of the very real contradictions of
society at a given moment.

Which brings me to the library, which is itself a category produced out
of contradictions, antagonisms, and mediations. It is not a simple
*thing*, complete and unchanging - which would be the Platonic view of
a category - but a snapshot of a constantly-moving system of social
relations each in contradiction to another. So it is unsurprising that,
at various moments, the social contradictions appear as crises within
the history of the category. Often these crises are insufficient to
completely revolutionize the category, but in the end radical
transformation of the category itself is assured (this, in a nutshell,
is the Marxist theory of revolution).

One such crisis, I would argue, attended the Toronto Public Library last
night, when one of their bookable public spaces was used to host a
[memorial for Barbara
Kulaszka](http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/lawyer-memorial-library-barbara-kulaszka-1.4201302), a lawyer who defended, among other
people, the Holocaust-denier Ernst Zundel. According to the
[Torontoist](http://torontoist.com/2017/07/toronto-public-library-refusing-cancel-planned-neo-nazis-gathering/),
"The memorial will have speakers like Marc Lemire, former president of
the Heritage Front, a neo-Nazi group; Christian Klein, who says Germans
were the real victims of WWII and that Jews ran camps where Germans were
tortured and murdered; and Paul Fromm, Canada's most prominent white
supremacist of the generation left standing".

The memorial has garnered criticism from the Centre for Israel and
Jewish Affairs, the Friends of Simon Wiesenthal Centre. A statement from
the library states that a) "the library accepts bookings... that are in
accordance with the law and the library's Rules of Conduct" and b)
"using library space... does not imply any endorsement".

The fact that the event garnered criticism, as well as the fact that
white supremacist organizations have recently become more public in
their activities, are social antagonisms which, in their contradictions,
effect changes in social categories, like the public library. The public
library is *different* now than it was a day ago, just as society is
different from when its room-booking policies were framed.

This is one of the difficulties involved in framing library values; it
could be argued that values, if specific enough (and they need to be
specific), are outdated almost as soon as they are set down. But
another, more egregious problem, is that organizational values -
*especially* those of a state institution - have to posit a
universalizing view of society in order to create consensus and maintain
hegemony. In this sense, institutional values are often (always?) little
more than propaganda. Put another way, institutional values are
ideological. But this raises yet another contradiction, since library
values, for example, are specifically meant to be *non-ideological*. A
good example is the ALA Code of Ethics, which purports to specifically
exclude individual ideology from library work, implying that the library
itself is above ideological considerations.

David Harvey, in his first major work, *Social Justice and the City*,
distinguished between two kinds of ideology: "Marx gives a specific
meaning to ideology - he regards it as an *unaware* expression of the
underlying ideas and beliefs which attach to a particular social
situation, in contrast to the *aware* and critical exposition of ideas
in their social context which is frequently called ideology in the west"
(18).

What we see in the value statements put out by libraries, or in the ALA
Code of Ethics, is ideology in the first sense, ideology that is
*unaware* that it is ideology, and that its ideology is liberalism. On
the other hand, movements like PLG, #critlib, and unaligned work such as
that on updating the LCSH headings to reflect something other than the
dominant liberal ideology, are examples of the second kind of ideology.

Barbara Goodwin, in *Using Political Ideas* writes that "in Britain we
imbibe liberal ideas effortlessly from an early age, with the result
that liberalism appears as a necessary truth, the basis of reality,
rather than as one political ideology among many" (35). In addition to
underpinning the notion of "neutrality" that continues to underpin so
many library narratives, liberalism also supplies the concept of
pluralism to the dominant ideology of librarianship. The notion of an
"ideology of librarianship" must seem laughable to, for example, the
framers of the ALA Code of Ethics, which attempts to enshrine the
concept of value-neutrality by explicitly denying the relevance of
ideologies to library work. The fact that the ALA Code of Ethics, like
most normative ethics which support the status quo does not need to
mention its liberal presumptions is merely a testament to liberalism's
hegemony: it is such a "necessary truth" that it can allow itself to
remain unmarked.

Given that the library is a state institution, perhaps the controversy
over last night's memorial boils down to an antagonism between those who
see the public library as a *social* institution with social
responsibilities, and those who see it as an institution of the state
with political responsibilities. This, naturally enough, is yet another
contradiction contributing to the identity of the public library. The
contradiction between social responsibility and political responsibility
boils down, in my mind, to the question of contradictory values: communal, humanist
values on the one hand, and liberal (i.e. individualistic,
"value-neutral" values based on the sanctity of private property) on the
other. These contradictions cannot be resolved through discussion,
though we might seek to expose them, de-mystifying the library as
dialectical cateogory, and making our positions known. They can only be
resolved over time, that is through a historical process, of
ever-increasing crisis leading eventually to fundamental social change.

It is futile to attempt to play it safe, to future proof, one's own
social position through vague, unactionable "values", such as those
which are typically propounded by library value statements. By
default, vague values or values which pretend to neutrality support the
unmarked, dominant, culturally hegemonic values of liberalism. One has
to commit to a set of specific values while not losing sight of the fact
that the world changes, moment after moment, and that we ourselves are
the products of social contradictions and mediations. Understanding the
dialectical nature of our relationships does not absolve us from taking
a stand; "not taking a stand" means siding with the implicit values of
liberalism and the state. But the values that we commit to, while specific and
actionable, have to be capable of change. Five years ago, the open and
unapologetic use of public spaces by far-right white supremacist groups
was not something we needed to worry about particularly. That time has
gone, and we need to decide whether our values are social ones, which
would deny oxygen to such groups, or political ones, which prioritize
the maintenance of hegemony and power above all else.
