---
layout: post
title: Robots and the Organic Composition of Capital
date: 2017-05-27
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

In her presentation at yesterday's session of [Marx's Capital after 150
Years](http://marxcollegium.org), Ursula Huws ridiculed the idea that
increased automation (e.g. robots) will (soon) replace all human
workers. She bases her argument on Marx's understanding of both the
organic composition of capital and the *temporary* profitability gained
from automation.

The organic composition of capital refers to the proportion of
constant capital, including machinery, to variable capital (labour). The lower the
organic composition of capital (i.e. the more human labour is used
compared to machinery), the higher the rate of profit. But capital is
always trying to lower the amount of human labour required in order,
they think, to increase profits through not having to pay for labour. One of the
contradictions inherent in capitalism is that capitalists are constantly
attempting to automate (i.e. replace human labour with machine labour),
in the attempt to lower labour costs, but this process ("the tendency of
the organic composition of capital to rise") in fact lowers the
profitability of a given capital.

Marx also argued that any gain in profitability due to increased
automation could only be temporary. Because profitability is a social
*average*, only an increase in productivity *above the average* makes a
given capital more profitable. Once the increase in productivity becomes
generalized, any profitability gain is lost, and the new level of
productivity becomes the average.

So for Huws, the current round of mass automation (including
robotization) is only attractive to capital as long as the effect on
productivity raises it above the average. A mad scramble for automation
up to and including "lights out" roboticized factories is currently
taking place, and the logic of capitalism means that only the first will
get the profits. Those who are too late will lose out, and at that point
the average productivity of that organic composition of capital which
equalize and no more profitability gains can occur.

What is interesting in this analysis is how difficult (impossible) it
is to imagine what will come along to kickstart profitability again.
Admittedly, we are very far from this point, and we will see robotic
automation replace previously privileged sectors of labour (like
immaterial and knowledge labour, for example) for some time to come. But
at a certain point capitalism is going to reach the point where the
existing model of automation (Dyer-Witheford identifies robotics and
networks as the key technologies here) will not allow any more increases
in profitability.

This is precisely the point capitalism reached which led
to the invention of digital technologies in the first place. That
inflection point comes precisely during World War 2, when capitalism was
finally nearing the end of a long crisis which began in 1914, and
included the Great Depression. The purpose of this crisis, like all
crises, was to wipe out a certain amount of value in order to allow
capital accumulation to restart. Was the development of digital
technology a cause or an effect of this recovery? I imagine that, for
those whose technology was industrial, and which reached its apotheosis
in the atomic bomb, digital technologies would have been more or less
unimaginable except to some people like Turing, Von Neumann, Wiener,
etc.

What this suggests is that when this equilibrium of productivity is
reached, we will see on the one hand, a crisis on the scale of the First
and Second World Wars and the Depression in order to wipe out capital
value, and on the other hand, a change in technology (means of
production) which we are currently unable to foresee. This new
technology will not be a quantitative increase in computing power (e.g.
Moore's law, and the basis for our current fad of machine learning). I
don't even think it will be artificial intelligence/consciousness; these
are too similar to our current model of technology. In reading Norbert
Wiener, it is interesting that he (and others) looked at the human body
as a new model for technological development (i.e. cybernetics), so
perhaps what we are looking for is a new, completely different, model on
which we can base our technological advances. Swarm nanotechnology may
be a contender, but I think it is very possible that this future is
currently outside the possibility of all but a very few of us to think.

I could be wrong about this. An interesting research question would be
whether, and to what extent, engineers, mathematicians, and industrialists foresaw the rise of computing and digital technologies prior to the Second World War.
