---
layout: post
title: "Fair Dealing and Private Property"
date: 2017-02-22
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

One of the things that Marxist theory insists upon is that
socio-economic phenomena cannot be viewed in isolation. Every phenomenon
exists within a social context, is the product of social relations
(grounded, fundamentally, in economic relations), and possesses a
history (i.e. it changes over time). Since this is Fair Dealing Week in
Canada (Fair Use Week in the US), I thought I would jot down some
thoughts about copyright and fair dealing in the broader context of the
property relations of late capitalism.

We (librarians, publishers, etc) most often tend to talk about copyright as if it
is a self-contained thing, though when we do place it in context, the
context is a legal one (a framework of rights and responsibilities defined by legislation and
past-practice). We refer to the copyright system or the
copyright regime, we refer to the rights of creators and the rights of
users, and Copyright Librarian positions tend to ask for legal
experience, sometimes even a law degree. Most of us (again, librarians,
publishers, etc) are not lawyers and have a very sketchy understanding
of the law. Talking about copyright in isolation makes sense - it's a
small, well-defined area of the law that we have a chance of getting our
heads around. Many of the Fair Dealing Week activities at my university
are focused on clarifying the conditions for meeting fair dealing
(primarily in an educational context).

But there is another context for thinking about copyright (indeed, it's
the wider context of the law in general) - the system of property
relations present in contemporary capitalist society. The closest we get
to acknowledging (though not critiquing) these relations is by referring
to those things that are covered by copyright as "intellectual
property". Private property is one of the legal foundations of the
capitalist mode of production that developed in Europe in the early
modern period. Prior to capitalism, property was either held in common
(among the peasantry), in fief (among those who rented land from
landlords) or at the pleasure of the crown (landlords). The crown's
property was not considered private in our contemporary sense because
the king or queen themselves were not considered private. Indeed, as
Habermas has demonstrated (in *The Structural Transformation of the
Public Sphere*), the very concept of "the public" developed
through the public presentation of royal power and prestige.

With the development of capitalism, through the process Marx calls
"primitive accumulation", property that was originally held in common
(i.e. not privately owned) was simply appropriated by the class that
would eventually become capitalists. A good example of this is the
process of enclosure of common land for the pasturing of (privately owned)
sheep herds from about the 13th century in England. Marx's initial
critique of private property stemmed from the condition of peasants who
were being prosecuted for taking firewood from once public, then
privatized land in Germany. Marx recognized that the social
relationships - between users (not owners) of land towards common land,
rather than between owners of private land - had changed, and were
causing social problems as the existing cultures and relationships -
i.e. commonly-accepted use of a common firewood supply - were no longer
adequate to deal with the new economic reality - privately owned
firewood which had to be purchased. The theory of how this process
works, how economic changes outstrip social relationships until those
social relationships have to breaj, is dealt with at length in the
*Communist Manifesto*.

Marx's critique of private property - which he set down in the *Economic
and Philosophic Manuscripts* of 1844 - transformed over time from the
cause of material inequality and oppression under capitalism to one of
the effects of a more fundamental set of relationships, the set of
relationships which come together in the commodity form. Commodities -
which include some but not all kinds of intellectual property - are
products produced in the first instance for sale (i.e. not produced for
immediate consumption, with the surplus being sold). Copyright, the
law which regulates the reproduction of certain kinds of commodities,
arose out of the new ease with which text could be copied after the
invention of the printing press. The Statute of Anne of 1709 explicitly
connects the regulation of copying with the profit to be derived from
the intellectual work by the author and their family.

Essentially, copyright is an attempt to artificially maintain the
exchange value of a commodity by limiting the production of the
commodity. For Marx, the exchange value of a commodity was determined by
the cost paid by the capitalist for raw materials and machinery, etc,
and the cost paid to labour (wages). With the development of the book
trade, the intellectual work of the author was *not* included in the
exchange value of the commodity (their cost/remuneration was handled
outside of the labour relations of the production process). The cost of reproducing a particular
book cost only the raw materials and labour of the printer (i.e. it did
not require labour by a new author), and the development of printing led
eventually to economies of scale as well, all of which would lead -
without copyright - to the plummeting of the exchange value of each
individual commodity (in FRBR terms, each item).

However, not every intellectual work is produced as a commodity (i.e.
for sale). What contemporary copyright regimes do, however, is "enclose"
non-commodities within the commodity form. Until the rise of, for
example, creative commons licensing, it was difficult (impossible?) to
explicitly place something in the public domain (defined negatively as a
region not covered by copyright rather than positively as common
property). We can see this, for example, in the system of
auto-registration of copyright.

So, when we talk about copyright and fair dealing, we're talking about
commodities and commodity relations. Fair dealing provisions are, to my
mind, part of the attempt to manage the exchange value of intellectual
commodities, just as copyright does. They are a recognition on the part
of the state that the free market principle - which would prevent *all*
uncompensated copying due to the foundational legal framework of private
property) - would have social (educational, innovative) consequences
that requires the right to copy to be protected. In this particular
instance, the state is mediating the requirements of two constituencies
of the capitalist economy: those who rely on subsidized information in
order to develop the economy (managers, entrepreneurs, scientists, etc)
and those who are simply protecting their private property right. So
fair dealing does not, in fact, balance the "rights" of users and
creators in some kind of altruistic sense; it does so only to further
the development of the capitalist economy through innovation and market
expansion. The use of the term "fair" here is simply propaganda, since
it's based on inherently *unfair* relations of production.

A few words about open-access. Some writers - most recently [David
Golumbia](http://ices.library.ubc.ca/index.php/workplace/article/view/186213) have attempted to use
Marxism to argue against OA, from the perspective that it erodes the
property rights of faculty members. Faculty members, in this
formulation, are workers who deserve to be compensated for their labour
through whatever exchange value can by extorted through private sale. In
Canada, this argument is disingenuous on its face as most faculty
members are already being paid for their labour (intellectual or
otherwise), and capitalism will never pay twice for the same work (which
sounds like a Ferengi rule of acquisition and probably is). Open-access,
to my mind, serves a similar function to copyright: it mediates between
the needs of one constituency of the capitalist economy ("users") and
another ("creators"). Where copyright is explicitly weighted towards
creators (hence requiring an exceptional mechanism like fair-dealing),
open-access is weighted towards users. But OA does not get us out of the
private property and exploitative labour relations of contemporary
capitalism. To lay the exploitation of workers at the door of OA (as
Golumbia does) is to misunderstand that copyright and open-access are
simply two mechanisms for the distribution of commodities and exchange
value within an inherently exploitative capitalist system. Both
open-access and copyright will become irrelevant as the crises of
capitalism deepen. As librarians, we can support open-access just as we
can support fair-dealing, but I think it is important to understand the
socio-economic relationships underpinning each of them. As far as
open-access gives more choice to the creator (author) in terms of
greater flexibility in how their work is reproduced and shared, I think
open-access is absolutely a plus. But it does not resist or circumvent
the labour and property relations of which it is a part.
