---
layout: post
title: "Dostoyevsky's Poor Folk"
date: 2017-01-07
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Dostoyevsky, Fyodor. *Poor Folk / The Gambler*, translated by CJ
Hogarth. London: Everyman, 1962.

Since it's the new year, I thought it would be a good plan to commit to
writing a post for each book I finish this year. I'm a chronic leaver of
books unfinished, but over the last couple of years I've realized that
just reading the beginning of a book - especially as I've started
reading more non-fiction - was really only giving me a superficial
understanding of the thing. Two books I read all the way through last
year made me really feel how much I had been missing by not finishing
books: John Bellamy Foster's *Marx's Ecology* and Neil Harding's
monumental *Lenin's Political Thought* - both of which end up being much
more than the sum of their parts by the end. Foster's book in particular
really needs to be read to the end in order to get the full weight of
his argument.

With that, then, I'll get started with the book I picked up when I
returned from vacation about a week ago: Dostoyevsky's *Poor Folk*
(1846). I've tried to get into this one before, but I've always given up
fairly quickly. Dostoyevsky's first novel, *Poor Folk* is epistolary,
and at first gives the impression that it's going to be very twee and
sentimental. The first letter, for example, begins like this:

>My dearest Barbara Alexievna, - How happy I was last night - how
>immeasurably, how impossibly happy!

Immeasurable happiness? In Dostoyevsky? I should have known things would
not remain in such a state. The story of the novel is thin enough: an
aging civil servant, Makar Dievushkin, has taken it into his head to support - emotionally
and financially - an impoverished young girl who lives in the building
opposite. They write letters to each other and share small amounts of
money as and when they come by it. He relates to her the trials and
tribulations of his office life and the poverty-stricken denizens of his
tenement building. She remembers her past, the way she and her mother
were used and abused by relatives; on the death of her mother, Barbara
Alexievna has come to live in this tenement. Essentially the novel
traces these two characters negotiations of the lives and conditions of
the very poor in 19th century St Petersburg. In the end, Barbara
consents to marry a man she does not love in order to escape.

As thin as the plot is, the interest lies not only Dostoyevsky's
detailed descriptions of the lives and harrowing situations of the
characters in the tenements. Indeed, the living conditions of the slums
of Petersburg make Dickens' descriptions of the poor of London seem
picturesque caricatures. Dostoyevsky, as always, is full of compassion
for this people, and it is in this that I think the secret of the
novel's reception lies. For *Poor Folk* was justly celebrated even
before its publication by such eminent critics as Nekrasov and Belinsky.
It's hard to judge, from reading the novel alone, quite what sparked
this enthusiasm.

If we take the state of Russian literature just prior to *Poor Folk*,
the landscape was dominated primarily by Pushkin and Gogol. Pushkin was
essentially an epic poet of the Byron mode who took as his subjects not
the heroes and adventurers of Byron but real Russian people (like
Eugene Onegin and Tatiana). At one point in the novel, Dievushkin -
Dostoyevsky's stand-in - sings the praises of
Pushkin's *Tales of Belkin*, a collection of five short stories
published in 1831. These introduced into Russian literature stories of
the poor and downtrodden, ordinary people, untouched by the Romanticism
of Pushkin's poetry or the grotesqueries of Gogol's fiction. For Gogol -
whose *Overcoat* (1842) provided the model for Dostoyevsky's second Novel *The
Double* - wrote about the "little people" of St Petersburg too, but he
placed them in fantastic situations far removed from the real life that
Dostoyevsky saw reflected in Pushkin. In *The Nose* (1836), for example, a St Petersburg civil servant wakes up to find that his nose has left his face and is living a life of its own. Dostoyevsky's *Poor Folk* looked at the same class as Gogol and Pushkin, but described their lives in all their squalid detail, with all the pathos and compassion that Dostoyevsky was capable of. It was the novelty of this approach, coupled with the straightforward narrative and Dostoyevsky's skill, that makes *Poor Folk* so important in the history of Russian literature, even if the story itself seems slight to us from the vantage point of more than 150 years later.

In this sense, *Poor Folk* inaugurates a new period of realism in
Russian literature, and gives a new resonance to a famous quote of
Dostoyevsky's: "We have all come out from under Gogol's Overcoat". As Nikolai Andreev writes in the introduction to the
edition of *Poor Folk* that I read:

>It is not only the acknowledgement of
>a debt, but also the declaration of Russian literature's emancipation
>from the 'soullessness' of Gogol and of his school of which the novel
>*Poor Folk* is the literary refutation.

Personally, I enjoyed *Poor Folk* - it's hard not to get caught up in
the fortunes of Makar Dievushkin and Barbara Alexievna - but it was also
nice to read a novel of Dostoyevky's that was psychologically
straightforward. I read *Demons* (*Devils*, *The Possessed*) last year,
and as fascinating as Dostoyevsky's more psychological novels are, they
can be exhausting. *Poor Folk* stands as a good reminder that he was an
extremely skillful writer who could write excellent "straight-ahead"
fiction when he decided to.

What also struck me, though, is how much the novel is about *books*. In
addition to Dievushkin's preference for Pushkin over Gogol, he and
Barbara Alexievna are constantly exchanging books, and one of
Dievushkin's acquaintances is the author of popular fiction in the Paul
De Kock mode (allowing Dosteyevsky to pastiche the style with
devastating effect). There is also an episode from Barbara Alexievna's
past which turns on the purchase of a complete set of Pushkin as a gift.
Books - both as novels and as physical, material objects - populate
*Poor Folk* just as much as the characters do. This, I think, speaks to
Dostoyevsky's own concern for books, the importance he places on reading
and writing as well as the physicality of publishing. This provides a
refreshing break from the squalor of the novel - no matter how bad
things get, all of Dostoyevsky's characters continue to read.

---------

The novel portrayal of the real lives of real people, in this case the
poor and marginalized, places *Poor Folk* in the tradition of those
books which expose the inhuman conditions to which various groups have
historically been condemned. Turgenev's *Huntsman's Sketches* exposed
the plight of the Russian serfs to such an extent that the book is
credited with helping convince Tsar Aleksandr II to emancipate the
serfs. Similarly, books like Ralph Ellison's *Invisible Man* recover and
express the lost or repressed humanity of an oppressed group, making it
- one hopes - no longer possible to ignore the humanity of those whom
  the ruling classes consider not human. Paolo Freire, in his *Pedagogy
of Hope*, writes that "while both humanization and dehumanization are
realy alternatives, only the first is the people's vocation". He argues
that "dehumanization" has never been the project or vocation of a
society, though I think that Dostoyevsky and - for example - James
Baldwin might disagree.

The strange thing about Dostoyevsky, the thing that marks his later,
more psychological and visionary novels as well as his first, is the
strange lack of anywhere to place *the blame*. Freire goes on to say
that "dehumanization... marks not only those whose humanity has been
stolen, but also (though in a different way) those who have stolen it",
and I think this is also a theme of Baldwin's. But for both Freire and
Baldwin it is clear who the oppressor is. For Dostoyevsky this is never
clear. Even in the famous Grand Inquisitor chapter from *The Brothers Karamazov*, the evil is somehow dispersed, dissipated, as if evil exists, and evil people exist, but these things are somehow merely contingent, tangential to the oppressive conditions in which people live.

I'm tempted to think that I simply don't fully understand Dostoyevsky
yet. It may be that I'm wrong, and there isn't some transcendent idea
behind all the manifestations he left behind, but I hope that isn't the
case. Dostoyevsky's work is too significant not to contribute at least
to some extent to a project of humanization. Indeed, Dostoyevsky himself
believed that that was precisely what his work was for. It remains to be
seen, from my perspective at least, whether that hope will be born out.
