---
layout: post
title: "Ranci&egrave;re's 'Hatred of Democracy'"
date: 2017-06-03
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---
Jacques Ranci&egrave;re, *Hatred of Democracy*, Verso, 2009.

From what I can tell, after reading just two of Ranci&egrave;re's books,
his political project is based on a radical egalitarianism that I'm not
sure I've seen to urgently expressed anywhere else. In *The Ignorant
Schoolmaster*, he argues for a recognition, or at least an *a priori*,
axiomatic positing, of the equality of intelligence, the fact that
anyone can learn anything. In *Hatred of Democracy* he argues that
democracy is the political condition predicated upon the fact that
anyone can govern. This, naturally, is not to the liking of all those
oligarchs of birth, wealth, and expertise for whom government is good
insofar as it is based on a natural legitimacy or "title to rule" which,
of course, has typically been based on birth, wealth, and expertise. It
is for this reason, Ranci&egrave;re argues, that oligarchs throughout
history (including Plato) have hated democracy. Democracy is the
government based on no principle of legitimacy, government based on the
idea that anyone can be both governor and governed.

>The pairing of democracy viewed both as a rigid form of government and
>as a permissive form of society is the original mode in which the
>hatred of democracy was rationalized by Plato himself. (94)

Oligarchies of all kinds - including the oligarchies of representative
democracy - are seeking at all times to find a principle of legitimacy
to set up a "natural" distinction between governor and governed, and at
the same time denigrate the excesses of democratic society. They see the
ills of society not in domination and exploitation, but in the limitless
desires, appetites and pleasures of the democratic consumer. It is this
argument that justifies their attempts to curtail democracy. As
Ranci&egrave;re puts it, it is the foundational fact of equality that
supports inegalitarian societies.


This is not an easy book - it is extremely dense and allusive and, I
think, presupposes a deep familiarity with French culture and recent
history, as well as all the intellectual dynamics and polemics the
circulate among them. However, close attention is repaid in the wealth
of radical ideas - the concept of a fundamental, bedrock egalitarianism
among them. The book also refers enigmatically to Ranci&egraves;re's complete
political theory, laid out in *Dis-Agreement: Politics and Philosophy*,
which I have yet to read, so I'm not sure I quite understand everything
that's going on.

Finally, it is a bleak book. After discussion all the ways in which
democracy - the concept of radical equality - is undermined, exploited,
and dominated by oligarchs of birth, wealth, and expertise, and the ways
that this plays out in contemporary society, Ranci&egrave;re argues that
the traditional beacons of political hope are illusions.

>The collective intelligence produced by a system of domination is only
>ever the intelligence of that system. Unequal society does not carry an
>equal society in its womb. Rather, egalitarian society is only ever the
>set of egalitarian relations that are traced here and now through
>singular and precarious acts. [...] It is only entrusted to the
>constancy of its specific acts. (96-97).

But this only goes to show that democracy is precisely an activity of
contestation, an ongoing struggle between egalitarianism and inequality.

>Democracy is neither a form of government that enables oligarchies to
>rule in the name of the people, nor is it a form of society that
>governs the power of commodities. It is the action that constantly
>wresrs the monopoly of public life from oligarchic governments, and the
>omnipotence over lives from the power of wealth. (96)

In the end, I think Ranci&egrave;re does, in fact, offer a very modest
suggestion for how to act under the totalizing logic of the current
system of domination. It is throughsmall acts of democracy, of total and
fundamental egalitarianism, that the (re)distribution of
public and private can always be contested, though this too is not
without its risks.

> This can provoke fear, and so hatred, among those who are used to
> exercising the magisterium of thought. But among those who know how to
> share with anybody and everybody the equal power of intelligence, it
> can conversely inspire courage, and hence joy.

It is the mention of the equality of intelligence that ties this book
(and political equality) with the equality of *The Ignorant
Schoolmaster*. Bit by bit I think I am starting to get an inkling,
piecemeal, of Ranci&egrave;re's intriguing political and intellectual
project.

===

As with Ranci&egrave;re's positing of equality of intelligence, this
radical egalitarianism has deep consequences for libraries. The current
governance model of libraries (and universities) is one predicated on
the title of expertise - whether that's defined as experience or
"excellence", marking a clear distinction between governors and
governed. This hierarchy also exists in the privileging of "leaders" and
"leadership". What is interesting here is the absent terms in these
"natural" hierarchies. We don't have a common term for "librarians who
aren't managers", nor do we hear about the "followers" required for
"leadership" to have any material basis. Following Ranci&egrave;re, I
would argue that this absence is based on precisely the same hatred of
democracy present in society at large. The fiction of a natural
hierarchy in our profession (of experts and... non-experts) is
maintained precisely on the absence of the subservient term despite the
physical presence of the people the term should describe. The
principle of collegial governance, lacking but paid lip-service to, is
predicated on exactly the capability of anyone to govern, which is
exactly why it remains an impotent signifier within the structures of
domination at play in academic libraries. The situation becomes even
worse when we expand our scope beyond MLIS-holding librarians to the
hierarchies of governance stretching "down" through library technicians
to support staff and subcontracted service workers (labour which is, as
we know, supported by "natural" hierarchies of race and gender). As
Ranci&egrave;re maintains, the inequality of our profession - like the
inequality of our society - is based precisely on a denial of equality
which is - radically - enshrined in our very democracy itself.
