---
layout: post
title: "Tyler A. Shipley: Ottawa and Empire"
date: 2017-05-26
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Tyler A. Shipley, *Ottawa and Empire: Canada and the Military Coup in
Honduras*, Toronto: Between the Lines, 2017.

(Disclosure: I've known Tyler since we were both in a Russian history
seminar taught by Oleh Gerus at University of Manitoba, sometime in the
late 1990s).

*NOTE: This is a pretty hot take, as I just finished the book last
night. I'm hoping to revisit and write something more in depth in the
near future, either here or in another venue.*

The crux of Shipley's argument can, I think, be summarized by saying
that, at some point in the late 1980s, Canadian foreign policy turned
towards an open imperialism, despite the maintenance by Canadian
politicians and the culture industry of an image of Canada as 'the good
guys'. Shipley argues that, having slowly emerged into at least a sort
of relative autonomy with respect to both Britain and the US, having
subjugated and consolidated its hold on Indegenous land, Canada turned
first towards making itself a competitive capitalist nation, and then
towards an imperial project of its own. The ignominious collapse of
Canada's Peacekeeping operations transformed into a glorious military
adventure in Afghanistan. In the meantime, Canadian politicians were
greasing the wheels for Canadian capital throughout the world, with
heavy interference in politics as a means for increasing and maintaining
corporate profitability, notably in Central and South America.

Honduras is a case in point, as Shipley forensically uncovers the
interlocking interests and maneuvers of the various parties involved in
carrying out, legitimating, and maintaining the coup and its leaders.
Honduran politicians, linked with drug traffickers and both public and
private police forces, the Canadian corporations who are taking and
ruining Honduran land through both quasi-legal and openly illegal
methods, and the Canadian politicians who both interfere in local
Honduran politics and legislation, and at the same time present the
bright and shining, innocent face of Canadian "do gooderism" at home,
representing the corrupt and rapacious Honduran state as good for
Canadian business. They will also benefit from contact with Canada's
record of human rights, democracy, rule of law, and good governance,
etc - the collective Tooth Fairy of Canadian culture.

It was interesting to read *Ottawa and Empire* so soon after Nick
Dyer-Witheford's *Cyber-Proletariat*. In many ways, Shipley's book read
like a "zooming in" to a detailed part of Dyer-Witheford's global
survey. The processes and mechanisms Dyer-Witherford describes at a
global level, Shipley digs into in minute detail, fleshing out what can
sometimes seem too high-level a view in Dyer-Witheford's work. On the
other hand, *Cyber-Proletariat* allows us to situate the Honduran case
within a global network of money and productivity (and profitability)
flows. The two books share a concern with exposing how both first-world
leisure and comfort (Dyer-Witheford) and national self-identity are
predicated, founded, on a material substratum of exploitation and
violence. The iPhone requires not only the rare-earth mines, but the
political and corporate ecosystem for the transformation of minerals
into the technology that has become so ubiquitous as to be invisible.
Similarly, the docility of the Canadian populace and their willingness
to go (or be sent) to fight foreign wars, is predicated on the increased
(and increasing) profitability of Canadian corporations on foreign soil:
all of which are resumed in the name of Imperialism.

Despite being an academically rigorous work, Shipley's book has two main
advantages over the usual academic fare. On the one hand, it is
exceedingly clearly written, something Shipley mentioned in an interview
is vital to getting the book actually read, rather than simply sitting
on a library shelf. On the other hand, Shipley was actually present for
many of the things he describes. One expects this in a book of
reportage, journalism or memoir, but in a work of recent history the
effect of this can be quite shocking, as in the following passage:

>In addition to the 12,000 police and 11,000 soldiers on duty on
>election day, the coup regime called up 5,000 reservists on November
>13, 2009, and brought on an estimated 15,000 private security agents
>from fourteen different companies, temporarily granted military
>fatigues, weapons, and powers. These heavily armed commandos patrolled
>the streets, the voting stations, and the highway checkpoints across
>the country. As I travelle with Honduran human rights observers through
>different cities and towns in the southern departments on electiond
>day, and in the days leading up to it, we were subjected to almost
>constant stops and searchers, and as we sat in community meetings, we
>heard story after story of intimidation and violence. (62)

The immediacy of this kind of writing is impressive, and cumulatively
adds to the urgency of the work and its message. The 2016 murder of
activist Berta C&agrave;seres provides a focus for Shipley's anger, as
it does for the popular movements within Honduras. The book ends with an
exhortation:

>An embattled social movement in Honduras has declared that 'Berta did
>not die, she multiplied.' It is imperative that her spirit live on, not
>just in Honduras, but in the activist networks of the North as well.
>The Canadian government is on the wrong side of history, but individual
>Canadians need not be. It is my sincere hope that this book will compel
>greater collaboration and solidarity between the social movements and
>organizations confronting imperialism in Honduras and those in Canada.
>The need has never been greater. (173)

This is an important book, especially right now, when the left in Canada
seems to be at an impasse, caught between a completely bankrupt party
system and (in my opinion) a directionless movementism. I really like
the idea that the left in Canada might learn from the popular movement
in Honduras by focusing on immediate issues and needs. How we decide
what those needs are is a difficult question, but one that I think is
vital to address right now. Highest on the agenda must, I think, be
Indigenous rights (whatever that looks like) and real movement on
climate change. The hard part will be getting people to recognize, given
the success of the Canadian propaganda machine, that
these are even issues at all.
