---
layout: post
title: "The Library: Pedagogy vs. Mathetics"
date: 2017-08-31
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

In [my
review](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2017/05/17/ranciere-ignorant-schoolmaster.html) of Jacques Ranci&egrave;re's *The Ignorant Schoolmaster*, I asked the following question:

>What if the library recognized and took ownership of its etymological
>history as a place of books? What if it began to take seriously a
>mission not of 'access to information' or 'access to material', but of
>'emancipation'. Whaf if instead of information literacy, we though
>about intellectual emancipation?

I've been thinking more about these questions, and about
Ranci&egrave;re's concept of radical equality, and it seems to me that
these ideas could have a serious impact on coming up with a mission for
libraries that does not merely see them as supportive of neoliberal
goals and requirements (both in terms of universities and
municipalities). Currently, despite the best intentions of library
workers, libraries are adrift in a current of competing interests, as
capitalism attempts both to recover from the previous economic crisis,
prepare for the next one, and deal with the ever-worsening effects of
climate change.

This round of thinking about this was sparked off by a few recent
meetings with or about our Teaching & Learning Committee. As usual, the
concepts of "learning styles" and "solid pedagogical principles" came
up, but without a lot of critical interrogation of these ideas. And it
occurred to me that the very basis of "pedagogy" violates
Ranci&egrave;re's principle of equality (as he himself notes in the
book). The word "pedagogy" comes from the Greek παιδός (child) + ἄγω (I
lead). By definition, then, pedagogy sets up an inequality between the
child - presumed ignorant - and the one who leads, the teacher. This
implicity inequality also turns up in narratives of library leadership
which tends to ignore that to have leaders, one must also have
followers; this is ignored in order to avoid difficult questions of the
place of "collegiality" and hierarchy in a system which privileges
leaders. In any event, "solid pedagogical foundations" must be based on
an inequality, not only of knowledge, but of ability to teach/learn (or else
the child could simply teach themselves).

This fundamental inequality is, obviously, the basis of modern
universities (it seems to have been less prominent in older European
universities where students were indeed expected to "teach themselves").
One could argue that this conforms with the hierarchical requirements of
late capitalism, just as the school timetable and desks-in-rows inured
schoolchildren to the exigencies of factory discipline in the 19th and
20th centuries. The academic library, in a mistaken (in my opinion) bid to be
taken seriously by the academy, attempts to play the pedgagogical game
by the academy's rules. We have "Teaching & Learning Committees", we
teach classes, we have librarians who consider themselves
teachers/pedagogues. But - going back to my original question - what if,
rather than conforming to the teacher/student inequality that forms the
basis of the academy, academic libraries went the opposite route, to
become places where this inequality does not hold, a place -
perhaps the only place in the university - where learning happens in the
absence of a teacher, where students are precisely expected to teach
themselves.

(Full disclosure: this was my experience of undergraduate university - I
learned the most from unsystematic reading through the library;
certainly much more than I learned from any of my classes).

Which brings me to "mathetics", a word coined by John Amos Comenius in
1680 to describe the science of learning (in contrast to "didactics",
the science of teaching). What would an academic library look like that
privileged mathetics over didactics/pedagogy? What if instead of
teaching tools/technologies/information literacy, we focused instead on
showing - hopefully by example - that learning can and must take place
in the absence of a teacher. ("Must" if we want to dispense with the
insidious cornerstone of inequality perpetuated by the universities).
Not only, in my opinion, would providing a space for
self-learning/self-teaching ("auto-didacticism") provide a fitting
*complement* to traditional classroom teaching leading to better
education ("leading out") overall , but it would also help dispense with
the imperative of "passing classes" which, under capitalism is subsumed
under the category of exchange value (and in a Freudian sense is
subsumed under the category of pleasing the teacher). It might also
foster more flexible, critical thinking, as students become liberated
from the constraints of their disciplines.

From the libraries perspective, I think adopting "mathetics" as our
mission would help to solidify our policies. Student space, collection
development, IT services - all of which, in my opinion, suffer from a
lack of focus, lack of direction, and lack of common vision, would, I
think, be brought into high-relief if we were to reconceive our mission
as supporting the self-learning of students *and of showing by example
how such self-learning works*.

From a dialectical perspective, the pedagogical inequalities of the
university are a thesis rife with contradictions. The current model of
the academic library attempts to conform to that thesis, leading to the
fairly dire position we currently find ourselves in (with respect to
relationships with faculty and students, vendor exploitation,
technological doldrums, lack of diversity, and reproduction of
oppressive socio-economic structures). Rather than being part of the
problem, dialectics suggests that by becoming the *antithesis* to the
dominant pedagogical model, the university itself would benefit, by
becoming a synthetic unity of the two opposites, something richer and
more well-rounded than it currently is.

I haven't spoken about the public library here, as in a way it is in a
better pedagogical/mathetic position precisely because it is not
embedded in an institution which sees itself as the standard bearer for
education. The constraints of neoliberal municipal requirements will
always deform the mission of the public library, but I think this is one
area in which the public continues (for now) to recognize the
possibility and desirability of self-education.

I'm intrigued by the possibilities that Ranci&egrave;re's principle of
equality holds for all kinds of social structures and situations, but
this idea - of the "mathetic library" - seems like something worth
pursuing. A commitment to a radical equality would also commit us, as I
suggested above, to a mission of emancipation, both material and
intellectual. Such a mission is something I think the library world
desparately needs.
