---
layout: post
title: Pateman's "Cultural Change"
date: 2017-05-23
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

[I first wrote about John
Pateman](https://redlibrarian.github.io/introduction/2016/05/10/public-libraries-history-state.html) around this time last year, responding
to one of his [Open Shelf
columns](http://www.open-shelf.ca/160415-snuffys-revenge/) about what
Pateman understands as the "true community-led library" (an example of
the No True Scotsman fallacy). As I said in "Public Libraries, History,
and the State", Pateman isn't exactly *wrong* in his understanding of
Marxis theory (though I think his understanding of the concepts is
simplistic), the problem is with his attempt to connect Marxist theory
to his understanding, first, of how libraries currently are and, second,
what need to be done to change them. Over the past year or so, Pateman
has written in his column on many topics related to Marxism and
libraries, public services, and organizational structure, and he has
gathered those thoughts together into a co-authored piece in Public
Library Quarterly called ["Managing Cultural Change in Public
Libraries"](http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01616846.2017.1318641). 

John Pateman wrote this article with Joe Pateman who, according to the author
bio, is "currently undertaking a Masters Degree at the University of
Nottingham, with a specific interest in the disciplines of Marxist political theory
and International Political
Economy (IPE)". This co-authorship is felt, I think, in the weight given
in the first half of the article to a reading of Maslow and Marx, using
Marx as a way to correct Maslow's "idealism". Admittedly, this goes
beyond the theoretical parts of John Pateman's columns, but is still
presented in an over-simplified manner, as if there has not been 150
years of debate, disagreement, formulations, and reformulations around
what Marx and Engels meant and how this might be applied to a given
historical moment. I can't speak to the reception of Maslow, but I
imagine there has been a lot of analysis and synthesis undertaken of his
thinking since his hierarchy of needs first appeared in 1943. My issue
is not so much with the interpretation of Marxism, though I find it
oversimplistic and too black and white. For example, given the following
statement: 

>This article combines the ideas of Karl Marx and Abraham Maslow and
>their theories of human needs to construct an Analytical Framework
>based on a specific interpretation of historical materialism known as
>technological/economic determinism. (1)

This confuses a few conceptual categories. There are many kinds of
technological or economic determinism, and such a determinism is one
possible criticism of historical materialism, but
"technological/economic determinism" is not an interpretation of
historical materialism. Indeed, few Marxists, I think, would agree that
historical materialism *is* a determinism. In any event, this is the
only mention of determinism, so it's difficult to understand exactly
what is meant by the term here, and how it connects Marx/Maslow with the
Analytical Framework.

Another example is the use of Stalin's *Dialectical and Historical
Materialism* to support the idea that the relationship between the base
and the superstructure is not unidirectional or directly causal. Many
Marxist theorists have dug into this topic (Gramsci, Althusser, and
Jameson to name just a few), but in addition, to simply cite Stalin in
support of a view that "the superstructure can exercise an important
role in shaping the base" undercuts the contention that the
"interpretation" of historical materialism is a determinism - a
deterministic position would argue precisely that the relationship
between base and superstructure was unidirectional and causal. There is
a contradiction in the theoretical component of the article.

However, the main problem is with the sections on libraries, culled, it
appears, from John Pateman's columns. The "analytical framework" used in
the article is simply offered without explanation. If the framework is analytical,
what was the empirical basis for the characteristics?; without a discussion of where
the characteristics used in the framework have come from, it appears as
if the framework was put together based on anecdote (or, to be
charitable, personal experience). In any event we don't know.

<img src="/assets/images/pateman_framework.jpeg"/>

Once again, I don't particularly *disagree* with Pateman's
characterization of "traditional libraries", but I don't know where
this characterization has been drawn from, which puts the other two
categories - "community-led" and "needs-based" - on very shaky ground
indeed, because they *look like* they have been invented for Pateman's
theoretical purpose, as models to be used to uphold his argument. This
isn't a bad thing in and of itself, but when they are present without
justifcation or explanation in an analytical framework, they don't seem
to be based on anything. And when - as has been discussed before -
Pateman uses a term ("community-led library") that is *more widely used*
to justify library budget cuts under neoliberal austerity, it muddies
his methodology, and forces him back on the No True Scotsman fallacy, as
mentioned above.

It is interesting, I think, that - while there are not many citations in
the theoretical part of the article - there are *no citations at all* in
the sections dealing with libraries. The argument isn't backed up by
anything, which allows Pateman to say whatever he likes about 
"community-led" and "needs-based" libraries. He is able to make them
sound as if they exist in reality and are not merely models.
This rhetorical move allows him to argue that these two kinds of
non-traditional libraries are based on Marxist/Maslovian theory while
not, in fact, showing that anywhere. A statement like this

>The Culture ensures that the Library is continually evolving and
>changing for the better and the public library is an agent of social
>inclusion... (13)

*looks* like a statement of fact, when in fact it is a theoretical
description of a model. As a result, Pateman is absolved of explaining
*how* the following situation arises; he is able simply to propose that
it does:

>Things are done in a spirit of curiosity and exploiration, and there
>are no hard and fast rules, which makes them easy to change. Staff know
>why the guidelines exist, had a role in deciding them, and can put
>forward suggestions for changing them. This makes distributing
>authority easier because everyone is following the same framework. (13)

Again, this is a theoretical postulation of a model state of affairs
rather than a description of fact. It ignores questions like, for
example, how those with authority react to its distribution? Again, a
statement like this one (about "needs-based" libraries) ignores the
entrenchment of power relationships within an organization *as well as
the relationships of power and domination within society that work to
ensure the maintenance of the status quo*:

>The Staff Structure is a Holacracy, which removes power from the
>management hierarchy and distributes it across clear roles, which can
>then be executed autonomously, without a micromanaging boss. (13)

No mention of funding bodies, fiduciary duty, the signing of paychecks,
worker organization, etc, etc. For Pateman, the organization exists in a
vacuum and there are - despite his insistence on the relevance of
Marxist theory - no *material* obstacles to a rational restructuring of
the organization. This absolves Pateman of the hard work of accomodating
those obstacles within his model. (Aside: has anyone figured out what
"non-users" means?)

Returning to the question of "determinism" (assuming that that *is* a
theoretical construct worth attaching an argument to, the Patemans seem
to disregard determinism (and historical materialism) completely when
they state the following:

>The Culture ensures that the Library is in a constant state of
>transformation and disruptive innovation and the public library is an agency
>of social change.

In what Marxist framework can culture *ensure* this? The role of culture
in society and organizations was pretty much the entire Frankfurt School
project, but there is no engagement with that work here.

It may seem as if I spend a lot of time arguing with Pateman's approach.
My issue is that I *do* see a valid place for Marxism in the
deconstruction and (hopefully) reconstruction of libraries as
institutions of social good, but in my view, Pateman uses an
oversimplified Marxism to underpin a vision of libraries that is not, in
the end, based on any material interpretation of the mode of production.
In this he risks, in the language and characteristics of his proposed
library models, *reaffirming* and further entrenching the values of
neoliberalism and inscribing those values in the fabric of libraries
themselves. I think this is inadvertent, I think he is arguing in good
faith, and I'm sure that social justice is a goal of his. But I think
that what he is arguing for and the way he argues for it risks
reproducing the dominant neoliberal values and methods, if only
accidentally.
