---
layout: post
title: Lenin, Gramsci, and "The Americans"
date: 2017-04-27
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

*Note: spoilers for s01e04*

*The Americans*, for anyone who doesn't know, is a TV show that started
in 2013, following the lives of two Soviet sleeper agentsi in the early
1980s, a husband and
wife team who have been operating in the US since 1963. The show was inspired by the uncovering and repatriation of a [Russian sleeper
spy ring in the US in
2010](https://qz.com/926553/what-happened-to-the-real-russian-spies-who-inspired-the-americans/). The show makes a lot of use of actual political and strategic events that took place in the early 1980s, notably the Star Wars defense programme. In season 1, episode 4, [Hinkley's assassination attempt on Reagan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attempted_assassination_of_Ronald_Reagan) take place, throwing the sleepers, their handlers in the Soviet embassy, and the FBI counter-espionage agents, into a tizzy. It becomes clear that the Soviets, hearing a statement by Secretary of State Alexander Haig that he was "in control here" (in the White House), assumed that the assassination attempt was part of an attempted coup, something the lead FBI agent finds ridiculous. He says to the mole he has planted in the Soviet embassy that that's not how it works in the US.

Razmig Keucheyan, in his survey of "critical theory", argues that
different strands of Marxism are marked by different views positions on
the question of power. Prior to Foucault's diffuse model of power, two
of the most influential understandings of power come from Lenin and
Gramsci. For Lenin, the conquest of state power was the fundmental
moment in the proletarian revolution; the imposition of the dictatorship
of the proletariat would both inaugurate the social revolution, and the
process of the "withering away" of the state (cf. *The State and
Revolution*, 1918). Keucheyan ascribes this focus on the capture of
state power to the fact that autocratic Russia had an extremely large
and powerful state and an almost non-existent civil society.

In Western Europe, on the other hand, civil society was much more
robust. In the prison notebooks, Gramsci wrote that

>In Russia the State was everything, civil society was primordial and
>gelatinous; in the West, there was a proper relation between State and
>civil society, and when the State trembled, a sturdy structure of
>civil society was at once revealed. (Quoted in Keucheyan, p. 40).

Keucheyan adds that this position "presupposes that in the West a 'war
of movement' is insufficient on its own for the overthrow of the
socio-political order". (40). It is precisely this misunderstanding of
the Soviet view of (state) power and the American that lies at the heart
of the episode.

At one point, Philip, the sleeper-husband, argues that the positive news
coming out of the White House (that Reagan was alive and likely to
survive) should be distrusted given that when the last two Soviet
leaders died (presumably Andropov and Chernenko), news of their deaths was suppressed
for several days. This indicates a solid understanding on the part of
the writers of this difference between Soviet and American political
life.

However, it raises the question of exactly how true this understanding of
Soviet politics and civil life actually is. It's true that state power
has played a integral role in the USSR and Russia (both before and
after the revolution) - autocracy turned into the powerful Soviet
bureaucracy, and then again into the monolithic capitalist state under
Putin - and this led to an interpretation of Soviet life as
totalitarian. But as Lenin and Gramsci understood, society is never
homogeneous, and no amount of control can be exercised totally. Just as
the US had (and has) its resisters - now, perhaps, more than ever - so
the USSR had its dissidents. But even besides resisters and dissidents,
there are always ordinary people going about their ordinary lives - that
is, civil society. The
situation of total fear and paranoia described by, say, Solzhenitsyn,
beggars belief. In the words of the FBI agent, society "just doesn't
work like that".

A final point to made with respect to this episode and the model of
state power it demonstrates - and this is either unconscious or an act
of pretty subtle subversion - the idea that the state that exists in a
"proper relation" with civil society is not amenable to a coup also
suggests that the state machine, backed by the power of civil society
and US-style bourgeois democracy, can carry on even if the head of state
is killed. At another level, however, it suggests a more important truth
of bourgeois politics: that the individuals who form the state - Reagan,
Haig - are interchangeable. If a trembling of state power can unveil the
power of the civil society that backs it, then the state itself is
unnecessary unless - as Lenin has it - it is nothing but the machinery
of oppression of one class by another. This idea opens the
door to a civil society being able to get along without a state
apparatus at all, one of the most basic elements in a future communist
society.

Thus the differences between Soviet and American views of state power
can be read as supporting both American bourgeois hegemony *and*, more
subversively, the eventual victory of communism.

Quotes from: Razmig Keucheyan, *The Left Hemisphere: Mapping Critical
Theory Today*, Verso, 2014.
