---
layout: post
title: Fitzgerald and McCarthy
date: 2017-06-28
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

F. Scott Fitzgerald, *The Last Tycoon*. Scribner's, 1941.

Cormac McCarthy, *Blood Meridian, Or the Evening Redness in the West*.
Modern Library, 2000 (1985).

I decided to reread *The Last Tycoon* when I saw the trailer for the
upcoming [Amazon TV
adaptation](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3390892/?ref_=nv_sr_1). Just as
with the recent *Gatsby* adaptation, this really seems to miss the tone
of the novel. It's as if the studios have a preconceived idea of
Fitzgerald's milieu that has been filtered through a romanticized view
of Flappers, Prohibition, Speakeasies, etc. Perhaps this comes from
Fitzgerald's "Jazz Age" stories, I don't know. It seems more likely that
it comes from a stylized, potted "structure of feeling" about the jazz
age that isn't really based on anything at all. It's what Jameson calls
pastiche, due to the fact that any real sense of the past that we might
have is lost. You see the same kind of thing in Waugh adaptations,
especially of the early novels, where the producers seem to miss
completely the brutal savagery of the lives of the "pretty young
things", even when their "vile bodies" are explicitly front and centre.
  What tends to be missing from Fitzgerald adaptations is how deeply sad
they are. Gatsby, Diver, and Stahr are all subdued, deeply worn down
figures, and they tend to drag everyone around them down with them. I
find the end of *Tender is the Night* incredibly moving, as Diver's life
has basically fallen apart but he has no choice but to just... go on
with it. Gatsby's suicide is not the tragedy of that novel; the last two
paragraphs display a momentary naive hopefulness on Nick's part,
undercut by the last sentence and the eternal futility it describes.
  Even though we only have six chapters of *The Last Tycoon*, none of
them finished to Fitzgerald's standards, reading those chapters is
extremely rewarding. Everything seeming to allude to whole swaths
of experience, realms of human relationships that we can only see
peeking out above the surface. Beneath the banter and the wealth there
are dark, heavy things going on. We'll see how the Amazon adaptation
managed to deal with any of that, but as with the abysmally wrongheaded
adaptation of Dick's *Man in the High Castle*, I'm prepared to be
disappointed.

---

I wasn't disappointed in *Blood Meridian*, but I was a little
dissatisfied. I read it pretty quickly - it took a week, which is pretty
good when you're working full time, I think - and despite the drawn-out
nature of much of the action, the quality of the writing and the
desperately eerie things going on keep it going. It *seems* as if
everything in the novel is geared towards making the *extremely*
ambiguous ending work, but this is belied by the fact that the novel is
based on real events and much research on McCarthy's part. As everyone
says, there's something of Melville in *Blood Meridian*, but with the
exuberance of *Moby Dick* replaced by a tight, almost suffocating
control over language and plot. In this sense, the novel conforms to the
ideas of control and conditioning, of preordained order that lie, I
suppose, at the heart of what McCarthy is trying to say. This fits with
what Josh Moufawad-Paul mentioned on Twitter, which is that the
equivalence between the violence of the colonizers and the colonized
which McCarthy is at pains to show up is deeply reactionary, in that by
supposing violence and war to be part of an eternal human order, it
presumes that the savagery of the Indigenous peoples pre-existed the
coming of the Europeans and in some perverse sense made them deserve
their conquest and extermination.
  I wonder if this is an aspect of *Blood Meridian* which has changed
over time. In 1985, when I was in elementary school, no-one spoke about
Columbus and the rest of the colonialists in anything but glowing terms.
Where I grew up, I don't think I heard anything about the violence of
the conquest until the mid- to late-90s when I wasn in university. So
it's possible that the depiction of *colonial* violence and savagery was
new and shocking in 1985, and that at the time the point was not to show
that two orders of violence (that of the colonizer and the conquered) that were known and admitted were the same, but was to show that the violence and savagery of the colonizers was *real*, in an America that was still in denial about that, and which was still trying to come to grips with the imperialist violence in Vietnam and Afghanistan. It bears pointing out that McCarthy started writing *Blood Meridian* in the mid-1970s, around the end of the Vietnam War, and that in 1985, the US-backed mujahideen were increasing their resistance to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. It's hard to condemn someone for imagining - in that context - the human universal of violence and war, and while that doesn't detract from Moufawad-Paul's critique of McCarthy's reactionary position, I'm happy to give McCarthy the benefit of the doubt, and say that *Blood Meridian* is a good faith attempt to come to terms with things that were happening within the dynamic of US imperialism.

So why was I dissatisfied? I loved the ambiguity of the ending, I
thought that was a great technical trick to pull off. And the writing,
obviously, is fantastic. But it never really seemed to add up to
anything beyond what was there on the page. I've read reviews by people
who have read *Blood Meridian* multiple times, but it doesn't feel like
a re-reader to me. Going back to the *Moby Dick* comparison, there's
something there that makes that novel feel larger and richer than what
you're actually reading. I'm holding off on re-reading it until so that
I can get the full effect, but I've been *feeling* like rereading *Moby
Dick* since I finished it, which says a lot. *Blood Meridian* is a great
technical exercise, and the ending is a fascinating achievement, but it
hasn't left me *feeling* very much.
