---
layout: post
title: "Review: The Winnipeg Strike: 1919"
date: 2017-11-29
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

A few years ago, I began mentioning to colleagues a tension I felt in my
work which I described as a tension between projects and services.
No-one I brought it up with ever really seemed to understand what I was
getting at, and so I tried articulating things differently or expanding
on what I meant, but I still never really gained any traction. What I
thought the problem was that systems work involves both *its own*
projects (designing and building a website or discovery system, for
example) as well as support services (writing code or reports for staff,
acquiring, configuring, and maintaining hardware, infrastructure,
responding to staff requests, updating hours, etc). The issue, I felt,
was that we didn't really have good processes, procedures, guidelines,
or priorities to help with managing these two kinds of work. Projects
and support services are very different kinds of work, and without solid
guidelines, responding to staff support requests tend to trump project
work, which requires dedicated time and energy, but tend to have longer
timelines and perhaps less tangible outcomes at certain moments of the
project lifespan. Staff support requests tend to be more discrete,
urgent, and concrete, in that there is a staff member waiting for the
request to be fulfilled. Staff support requests are, compared to project
work, low-hanging fruit. My frustration was with not having clear
guidelines on how to manage the work (and the expectations) around these
two kinds of activity.

But more recently I've had a minor epiphany. The reason colleagues
didn't seem to share my concern around what I saw as an unacknowledged
tension in the work that we do is, quite simply, because that tension is
not present in their work. The vast majority of the work my systems unit
does is in support of staff work and initiatives. I may be the only
one in the unit whose work includes both direct user-facing projects and
staff support requests. There are internal IT projects, of course, but
these are always part of the support function, not systems-initiated
projects with an unmediated user-focus. Even in website design and
implementation, for example, which seems like it would be the equivalent
to a user-facing project in other units, staff voices are privileged:
they are closer, louder, and have access to privileged channels of
communication like an internal help-desk. Our website design and
implementation is governed by a staff committee. As much as we try to be
user-focused and user-centred, staff concerns and desires drown out
student and faculty voices. This is why talking about UX from the
perspective of a systems librarian is so different from talking about it
from the perspective of someone in, say, a digital scholarship or RDM or
scholcomm role.

But what's the problem? Isn't this just the nature of library systems?
Perhaps it is - perhaps during my ten years as a systems librarian, I've
been naive. Certainly my library school experience didn't prepare me at
all for what actual library systems work was going to be. But I think
until very recently I nurtured an idea that library systems work had a
user-focus and an intellectual content akin to other library units:
cataloguing and metadata, or public service, or - and this might be the
best example - something like GIS librarianship. I envisaged my
particular skills - an intersection of librarianship training, technical
knowledge, and critical thinking - as positioning me for a particular
*positive and constructive* role in the lives of students, researchers,
and faculty. But after ten years I realize that systems work - at least
in my experience - really just needs someone with the technical capacity
to support the work of *other* librarians and staff units (or to
supervise those who do). This is not to denigrate that kind of systems
work, but it's not what I signed up for. And I have to admit I'm envious
of other librarians who are putting their intellectual command of a
particular field of librarianship - again, I think of GIS - to work with
students, researchers, and faculties as an equal participant, as a
teacher, or to do their own research in support of the intellectual
goals of their own area of librarianship.

I recently applied for a secondment to be a branch head in our library
system. When the AUL in charge let me know that I had not been
successful, she admitted surprise that I had the experience and skills
to branch out from systems work. Perhaps this is another area of
frustration borne out of the position of library systems as (primarily)
a staff support service: being seen as a technician or IT-geek, rather
than as a librarian, with the same concerns, perspectives, and
experience as other librarians.
