---
layout: post
title: "'The Peripheral' & 'Seveneves'"
date: 2017-04-18
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

William Gibson, *The Peripheral* (New York: Putnam's), 2014.

Neal Stephenson, *Seveneves* (New York: HarperCollons), 2015.

*Note: Spoilers for both books*

I don't often read contemporary fiction, but every so often I get the
urge to see what's being written nowadays. Perhaps because I've been
writing so much about technology these days, I thought I would give
Gibson's *The Peripheral* a try. Despite being pretty much the exact
demographic for Gibson's stuff (you can fill in the blanks), I've only
read *Neuromancer* and a few of the short stories. What I've read has
generally left me cold, and a reread of *Neuromancer* a couple of years
ago confirmed my suspicion: Gibson has the ability to match the right
(high-)concept with the right elements of the zeitgeist to create a
plausible world "twenty minutes into the future" (as Max Headroom put
it). *Neuromancer* is well worth reading for the vision of the future
(our present, for the most part) that Gibson imagined, what he got right
and what he got wrong. But it no longer has the power of *the new* that
I imagine it did when it appeared in 1984. Cyberpunk is old hat to us
now; the colour of a detuned TV is blue, not snow...

With genre fiction, it often seems that the genre conventions,
especially in terms of plot, are a useful armature on which to hang the
author's concerns. The worst kind of genre fiction is bland and
formulaic, but the best - Chandler's noir, for example - flesh the
formulaic plot out with ideas and problems just beyond the capacity of
most genre fiction to address. Unfortunately, a genre plot can often be
shoehorned on to a story, giving shape where shape doesn't exist - this
is the problem with *The Peripheral* and - to a lesser extent -
*Seveneves*. Gibson's set up and worldbuilding in *The Peripheral* are,
as usual, great - both the world of the stub (twenty minutes into the
future of the kind of poor white libertarian outlaws so enamored of TV
these days) and the post-apocalyptic London in which the stub exists,
are really well-drawn. There are glimpses of fascinating mysteries in
this world: what kind of war engendered the creation of "haptic"
soldiers? How was the stub server ("somewhere in China") discovered?
What is the nature of the stub's reality. Instead of following up on
these ideas, perhaps using a genre plot to frame them, Gibson's focus is
on the genre plot itself, using these ideas as incidental flavour. The
problem is that the genre plot is... a little lame. An AV Club reviewer
writes that *The Peripheral* "delivers a rote noir procedural", and I
think that this would be all right, if the procedural took a backseat to
the questions, when necessary. Gibson, and perhaps this is the right
call when writing "commodity fiction" is concerned almost exclusively
with delivering his plot with the right pacing; the interesting
questions, problems, and mysteries of the world he has created come
second to that.

From the perspective of a world
perhaps closer to the bring of nuclear war than at any time since the
Cold War, with the added bonus of an increasing rate of climate change,
portending a cataclysim which could make nuclear war look cozy, one of
the most fascinating hints is the banality of the jackpot (the
apocalypse which lies between the world of the stub and the depopulated,
nanobot-curated future London). It clearly causes Wilf some pain to
recount the details of the jackpot, but it happens "off camera", and
everything seems to have turned out all right in the end. So the
jackpot is both an apocalypse and... well, just something that happened.
Climate change had something to do with it, but mainly what it spurred
was a welcome (and overdue) depopulation of the earth and the spur
humanity needed to develop the technologies that would make
post-scarcity a reality, even if it's a kleptocratic post-scarcity. This
may sound cynical, but - bar the mechanics of the noir plot - it's
actually pretty techno-utopian. I can't even rememeber the maguffin of
the noir plot, but needless to say it all falls a bit flat when nanobots
can create anything you need.

Techno-utopianism is something Gibson has in common with Stephenson,
though Stephenson's tends to be unalloyed by any nightmares such as
Gibson can imagine. Full disclosure: I've only read half of
*Quicksilver*, half of *Cryptonomicon* (multiple times), and *Anathem*.
*Cryptonomicon*, with its picaresque globetrotting, and its Dickensian
tone leaves me cold - I think you have to be more absorbed by the
technical ideas than am to really sink into it. *Quicksilver* I've found
interesting, but it's a dense read. *Anathem* I really liked, though I
felt let down by the ending. Stephenson, like Gibson, seems to feel that
his novels require some kind of genre plot to give them shape or pacing,
but unlike Gibson, he tends to spring the genre plot at the end, perhaps
to make up for a failure of imagination or technique after maintaining
tension and story for 600+ pages.

So let's get the main problem out of the way. The first two-thirds of
*Seveneves* are set on earth and on (what becomes of) the international
space station after something destroyes the moon. A Neil Degrasse Tyson
standin predicts that the leftover chunks of the moon will soon grind
themselves down into pieces too small to remain in orbit, and will come
crashing down on earth in a fiery apocalypse. The first 600 pages of
*Seveneves* is basically just a gripping working out of the consequences
of the destruction of the moon. And it's great. It could lose a hundred
pages or so probably, which would tighten things up, but it's  so
detailed and the ideas so thoroughly worked through, that it's very
gripping. Stephenson, like Gibson, isn't as good on people as he is on
ideas, but you're reading both of them for the ideas, mainly, so that's
good enough. The third part of *Seveneves* jumps "five thousand years"
later, when the bombardment of the earth has ceased, and the survivors
of the human race have reseeded the planet with water from comets, flora
and fauna from the DNA stored on the space station when the Hard Rain
began. I didn't find the jump of five thousand years particularly
jarring - it's science fiction, I'm OK with it. The world of five
thousand years hence is - as usually - fascinating and drawn with an
immense amount of technical detail (this section too could probably
stand to lose about a hundred pages). What bothers me more is the jump
from realistic, "twenty minutes into the future" speculative fiction, to
the kind of militarized Marvel Comics science fiction that - I assume -
Stephenson felt he needed either to attract the fanboys, give the book
an ending, maintain the pace in the (200 page) spring to the end, or all
of the above. The story in part three was adequate, the details of the
future world were fascinating, and dealt with the consequences of
decisions made by the survivors thousand of years ago, and introduced
twists to the narrative that, I think, would have been good enough for
a, say, 50- to 100-page epilogue to the main story. As it was, the
shoot-em-up elements of the last third were jarring.

Even without an epilogue - and perhaps this is where a cutthroat editor
would have been a benefit - the first two thirds of *Seveneves* are
fantastic. I think the novel could have ended with the council of the
Seven Eves and it would have been a wonderfully ambiguous ending to a
story all about minimizing ambiguity. Perhaps section three could have
been a standalone novel, set in the *Seveneves* future.

Stephenson seems to write two kinds of books: picaresque
techno-thrillers (*Cryptonomicon*, *REAMDE*) and set-em-up-knock-em-down
speculative fiction (*Anathem*, *Seveneves*). I much prefer, I think,
the second kind, but in both *Anathem* and *Seveneves*, it's as if
Stephenson hasn't trusted himself to end the novels without a leap from
speculative fiction to genre fiction; perhaps this, too, lies at the
heart of Gibson's reliance on genre. It's interesting to compare them
both with, say, Philip K Dick, who mined the same area (speculative
fiction) in a completely different way.
