---
layout: post
title: Class, Contract, and Copyright
date: 2017-07-14
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

This post was inspired by a couple of tweets by Ryan Regier:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-partner="tweetdeck"><p lang="en"
dir="ltr">Understand that authors want to get paid, maybe need to rework
our fair dealing arguments so we show how fair dealing ultimately helps
them?</p>&mdash; Ryan Regier (@ryregier) <a
href="https://twitter.com/ryregier/status/885879165794361344">July 14,
2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="//platform.twitter.com/widgets.js"
charset="utf-8"></script>

These tweets got me thinking about the contradictions that underlie the
modern concept of copyright. In many ways, copyright has to be
understood as a mechanism for the protection of private (economically
significant) property. Copyright is a provides legal limits on how
material resources may be used with or without an economic exchange. In
essence, copyright provides a framework for *contracts*.

The contract is one of the founding myths of capitalism, as a glance
into Milton Friedman's *Capitalism and Freedom* will show.

>In the complex enterprise and money-exchange economy, co-operation is
>strictly individual and voluntary provided: (a) that enterprises are
>private, so that the ultimate contracting parties are individuals and
>(b) that individuals are effectively free to enter or not to enter into
>any particular exchange, so that every transaction is strictly
>voluntary. (20)

The role of the state in this view is

>to protect our freedom both from the enemies outside our gates and from
>our fellow-citizens: to preseve law and order, to enforce private
>contracts, to foster competitive markets. (10)

This view of the primacy of the contract-relationship is predicated on
another of the founding myths of capitalist society, that of the
uncoerced, fully-rational individual.

>In summary, the organization of economic activity through voluntary
>exchange presumes that we have provided, through government, for the
>maintenance of law and order to prevent coercion of one individual by
>another, the enforcement of contracts voluntarily entered into, the
>definition of the meaning of property rights, the interpretation and
>enforcement of such rights, and the provision of a monetary framework.
>(31)

From this perspective, then, the problem with any kind of fair use/fair
dealing provision is *not* - or not *only* - that creators go
uncompensated (uncompensated creation is one of the cornerstones of
capitalist production after all), but that it circumvents the
contractual relation. Material resources copied and exchanged outside of
a contract - either with Access Copyright or with the creators
themselves - is seen as a failure on the part of the state to uphold its
responsibilities as enumerated in the last Friedman quote above.

However, as the Supreme Court has maintained, fair dealing is a user
right. However, even stating that fair dealing is a user right merely
*exposes* rather than resolves the underlying property conflict. The
relations between creators and users, if it is *not* contractual, has
to be antagonistic - not necessarily in a moral sense, but in the sense
of the sanctity of property and contract. As the
Supreme Court said,

>Fair dealing is a "user's right", and the relevant perspective when
>considering whether dealing is for an allowable purpose under the first
>stage of CCH is that of the user.

>The purpose of the fair dealing exception [...] is to ensure that users
>are not unduly restricted in their ability to use and disseminate
>copyrighted works.

(Both Supreme Court quotes are from Michael Geist's blog post on
[*Access Copyright v.
York*](http://www.michaelgeist.ca/2017/07/ignoring-supreme-court-trial-judge-hands-access-copyright-fair-dealing-victory/)

What we have here, then, is a property-protection mechanism which is
circumventing the contract, the main property-protection mechanism in
capitalist society. The real reason authors and copyright "collectives"
are up in arms about fair dealing and are trying to restrict it is not
only - perhaps not even primarily - because of lost revenue, but because
it undercuts the sanctity of the contract in capitalist economic
relations.

But what about creators, those who, unlike Access Copyright, are perhaps
losing income through a broader interpretation of fair dealing? Myron
Groover
brought up the question of representiveness of creators rights
advocates. Do we hear more from them because they are louder/more vocal?
What about the creators who believe their work *should* benefit from the
wider dissemination and use supported by fair dealing.

In a nutshell, what individual creators think about this issue is not
particularly relevant. Just as individual capitalist may not want to
exploit their workers, but are forced into it by competition and other
exigencies of the capitalist mode of production, so creators are forced
by virtue of their class position to behave in certain ways and to take
certain positions with respect to the protection, exchange, and use of
their property. Creators who have day jobs that pay the bills are
primarily workers, their primary form of income is through the sale of
their labour power, with all the coercive elements that comes with.
Creators who are the heads of large business concerns, like
Beyonc&eacute; and Jay-Z, are capitalists who will protect their property
rights just like any other capitalists. It seems, though, that the
majority of creators who are vocal about creators rights are those who
are able to eke out a living by selling the product of their labour.
Their opinion on whether fair dealing is a healthy and necessary part of
any copyright regime is beside the point, which is that they are forced
to protect what little economic benefit they gain from the sale of their
work by any means possible.

Which brings me to my last point. The word "fair" in "fair use" and
"fair dealing" is an obscene euphemism. Just as Friedman's insistence on
the lack of coercion in capitalist exchange relationships would be
laughable if it did not obscure such misery, the idea that anything
connected to capitalist property relations might be "fair" is ridiculous.
We - citizens of our liberal democracies - have to go to court again
and again to try to maintain a little breathing room under the pressure
of capitalist exchange relations, what Marx and Engels in the
*Manifesto* referred to as the "cash nexus" to which every human
relationship is eventually reduced. Dealing can only be described as
"fair" within the context of the liberal pluralist model of governance
that is our government's aesthetic, and it cries out for demystification
at every turn. However, we too are forced by the logic of capitalist
production and exchange to take what we can get. It may not be fair - to
any of the parties involved - but it's currently all we have.

Addendum (July 15, 2017): I realize that in the above I didn't spell out
the conclusion strongly or clearly enough. Given that creators and users
are both exploited in the current situation, one through the inability
to contractually exchange their work for revenue, the other through the
prohibitive barrier to use caused by the prices of the resources being
exchanged, it seems clear that the only way to resolve this
contradiction is not to tinker with the details of copyright legislation or the fair dealing exception, but to fundamentally overturn the property relations that underpin them. Creators will always be at the mercy of exploitative market forces as well as being more and more alienated from the (very personal) products of their labour, and users will always be seeking non-contractual or illegal workarounds to use the resources they need for work and study. The only solution, really, is for both sides of to come together, recognize their common interest, organize, and work towards the overthrow of capitalist economic and social relations.
dealing 
