---
layout: post
title: "Review: The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao"
date: 2017-02-12
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Diaz, Junot. *The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao*, New York: Riverhead
Books, 2007.

It's always seemed to me that there were two trends in the English novel
(the novel in English, not the novel of England). There's the Jane
Austen-type, where the "ironic distance" between the narrative and the
characters is low, the writing is meant to provoke in the reader the
feelings of the characters, and much more is *shown*, not *told*. On the
other hand there is the Dickens-type novel, with a high degree of ironic
distance, the writing is meant to entertain with tales of the
characters, and much more is told instead of shown. The style of the
first tends towards verbal stability, the second to exuberance. Both
kinds of novel develop out of early-pre-novelistic literature, and
neither is more or less legitimate than the other. Nevertheless, the
two trends diverged somewhere around the time of, say, *Tristram Shandy*
(1759) and both styles are rarely, if ever, attempted by the same
author. (Dickens tries it in the first section of *Great Expectations*
and John Fowles' also attempted it). The crowning achievement of the
Dickens' type novel is probably *Ulysses*, but that type is always
looking to produce extraordinary examples, outliers. The first type is
always looks to keep its head down, and general consensus seems to be
that the crowning achievement here (if one can be said to exist) is
*Middlemarch*.

*The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao* is a novel of the second type,
drawing not only on the tradition that runs from *Tristram Shandy*
through Dickens to Salman Rushdie, but also on the Latin American
tradition of Garcia Marquez and Vargas Llosa. The verbal exuberance of
*Oscar Wao* is fleshed out not only by plenty of colloquial Spanish, but
also through references to science-fiction and fantasy, as well as to
deliberately unscholarly-sounding footnotes. As always with this kind of
novel, puns and wordplay abound, and while this all makes for an
entertaining read, it suffers the same problem as all the novels of the
second type (except *Ulysses*) in that it tells more than it shows. We
witness the tribulations of Oscar's family, but we do not really feel
them.

Diaz himself is aware of this:

>How she survived I'll never know. They beat her like she was a slave.
>Like she was a dog. <u>Let me pass over the actual violence and
>report</u>
>instead on the damage inflicted: her clavicle, chicken-boned; her right
>humerus, a triple fracture (she would never again have much strength in
>that arm); five ribs, broken; left kidney, bruised; liver, bruised;
>right lung, collapsed; front teeth, blown out. About 167 points in
>damage total and it was only shee accident that these motherfuckers
>didn't eggshell her cranium, though her head did swell to elephant-man
>proportions. (147, emphasis added).

The "report" of the violence not only becomes a laundry-list of
wordplay, but the reference to role-playing hitpoints and the elephant
man, the out-of-nowhere "motherfuckers" all serves to take us away from
the violence as it was actually inflicted. There are reasons for this -
Diaz' novel is about the effects on a single family of the violence and
distortian of the Trujillo dictatorship in the Dominican Republic - and
whether you prefer this or something more intimate, more sensible, is a matter of taste
only, I think. And certainly one doesn't have to choose - the clinical
language and descriptions of Garcia Marquez which achieve enormity or the blood, sweat, and
tears of Jane Austen - literature has room for all of this.

On the other hand, it's difficult to understand whether Oscar Wao
himself is meant to represent anything beyond himself. In novels of the
second type, allegory, representation, symbolism abound (one thinks of
the repeated names in *One Hundred Years of Solitude* or the
word-painting in *Ulysses*), so it's tempting to think that Oscar, the
overweight virgin geek who eventually falls to the violence of the
regime, is meant to represent something more, but I'm not sure I can
tell what that is. Perhaps, true to the postmodern vision, this is
nothing but play, and I shouldn't be looking too deeply for hidden
depths (postmodernism and postmodern novels being concerned primarily
with surfaces), but it *does* seem as if Diaz wants to say something
serious about about the violence of politics, families, and
dictatorships. Does the playfulness, the surface play, undermine that?
I'm not sure.

This was certainly entertaining, and there's a lot to enjoy in the book,
but I'm not sure it quite got where it intended to go.
