---
layout: post
title: "Review: Vile Bodies & A Month in the Country"
date: 2017-12-13
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Evelyn Waugh, *Vile Bodies* (Penguin, 1973) [1930]

J.L. Carr, *A Month in the Country* (Harvester Press, 1980)

>'My private schoolmaster used to say, "If a thing's worth doing at all,
>it's worth doing well." My Church has taught that in different words
>for several centuries. But these young people have got hold of another
>end of the stick, and for all we know it may be the right one. They
>say, "If a thing's not worth doing well, it's not worth doing at all."
>It makes everything very difficult for them.'

I've subscribed to something very similar to this for a very long time,
which I think informs many positions I take with respect to the place
and value of work in society, communism, and librarianship. Nothing
frustrates me more than "make work" or the implementation of someone
else's decision when I can't make out the goal, design, or purpose of
the work itself. In a way, both *Vile Bodies* and *A Month in the
Country* are books about work, but they approach the subject in very
different ways.

The Bright Young Things of Waugh's novel are the children of the (very
slowly) declining aristocracy and upper middle-class. Things have
changed from, say, the bourgeoisie of *Pride and Prejudice* for whom
work is complete mystery. The Bright Young Things are living off their
parents' debt and accruing debt of their own, and the breakneck speed
and disjointed rhythm of the novel suggests that crisis is just around
the corner. Indeed, the counterfactual war which breaks out at the end
of the novel is justified by the very real fact of war as a means to
defuse crisis under capitalism. Waugh isn't someone I would ordinarily ascribe such
perspicacity to - and it's as likely due to his misanthropy as to any
economic insight - but the coming of the second world war nine years
later certainly bears out Waugh's point.

It took me a long time to like Waugh, though my dad was always reading
him. I felt Waugh's comedy was shallower or less important than, say,
Greene's heavy novels. I finally grasped the depth of Waugh's savagery
when I read *A Handful of Dust* in library school - I still haven't
mustered up the courage to re-read that one. *Brideshead* is, I think,
clearly his best, but the satire has been dulled and something akin to a
warm nostalgia suffuses that book, even as he occasionally skewers its
subjects. *Vile Bodies* is a good book to read, as Melville writes
in *Moby Dick*,

>whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth; whenever it is a
>damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find myself involuntarily
>pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up the rear of every
>funeral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand
>of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from
>deliberately stepping into the street, and methodically knocking
>peopleâ€™s hats off.

Judging by conversations I've had with many people recently, a lot of us
are feeling this way at the moment; Waugh's comedy is a better
restorative than Greene's tragedies, no matter what my nineteen-year-old
self would have argued.

---

The connection to work is much clearer in *A Month in the Country* than
in *Vile Bodies*. I decided to read this after stumbling upon the film
version on YouTube on the weekend (which stars a very young Colin Firth,
Kenneth Branagh, and Natasha Richardson). It's one of those *very
English* things which makes a liar of every high school English teacher
who insists that every story must have a conflict.

Tom Birkin, still recovering from his experience of the first world war
(and Passchendaele in particular), has been contracted uncover a
medieval wall painting in a Yorkshire church. He spends the summer of
1920 sleeping in the belfry, working on the restoration, and making
friends with the locals, including the rector's wife Alice Keach, and
Charles Moon, another demobbed soldier with a job of his own to do. The
novel is about the restorative capacity of a simple life in the country,
good weather, friendship and, most importantly, of unalienated labour.
Like *A Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich* and Tarkovsky's *Andrei
Rublev*, *A Month in the Country* falls into a subgenre we might as well
call "salvation by work". Some of Birkin's impressions have to do with
the meaning of professionalism - a much different "professionalism" from
either Austen or Waugh:

>You know how it is when a tricky job is going well becuase you're doing
>things the way they should be done, when you're working in rhythm and
>feel a reassuring confidence that everything's unravelling naturally
>and all will be right in the end. That's about it: I knew what I was
>doing - it's really what being professional means.

(Note: "being professional" rather than "being *a* professional). Compare
this passage to what Ivan Denisovich experiences building a wall in
Solzhenitsyn's novella.

I don't think I would argue that *A Month in the Country* is any kind of
first-rate literary artefact, but it's competently - professionally -
done, and it has a charm that really fits with the dead, grey end of the
year when we all feel like stepping into the street and knocking
people's hats off. And it has ambition, I think, of a quiet kind. If a
thing's not worth doing well, it's not worth doing at all.
