---
layout: post
title: Copyright and Property
date: 2018-05-09
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Yesterday, I finally had a chance to read the [CFLA Position Statement
on Indigenous Knowledge and the Copyright
Act](http://cfla-fcab.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/CFLA-FCAB_Indigenous_knowledge_statement.pdf).
What I took away from the Statement - and subsequently tweeted about -
was that CFLA promoted the protection of Indigenous Knowledge within the
existing regime of Copyright Law and (European) concepts of private
property, including intellectual property. This reading could be
challenged - the Statement does argue the difference between Indigenous
and Canadian notions of property ownership ("Who holds 'legal' copyright
to [Indigenous] knowledge or cultural expression under Canada's current
*Copyright Act* is often contrary to Indigenous notions of copyright
ownership"), but to my mind the framing of this issue as in relation to
the Copyright Act situates the Statement within existing property
relations that the Copyright Act is intended to uphold. 

This is especially clear, from my perspective, in the opening sentence
of the Statement, which begins: "Canada's *Copyright Act* does not
protect Indigenous knowledge..." This, to me, takes for granted that the
Copyright Act is *intended* to protect knowledge, which it isn't. It's
intended to protect (private) property rights in a particular category
of property (intellectual property). The property rights it is intended
to protect are rights that constitute the institution of bourgeois (that
is, capitalist) private property. By positioning the Copyright Act as an
instrument for the protection of knowledge, the CFLA Copyright Committee
is able to argue that Indigenous knowledge - in all its particularity of
expression - can and should be protected by the Copyright Act. But once
we recognize that the Copyright Act is *not* intended to protect
knowledge, but to protect a *single* kind of property relationship
(bourgeois private property), then the protection of Indigenous property
and property relationships (in all their particularity) becomes
impossible. By tacitly placing Indigenous knowledge protection under the
aegis of an instrument for the protection of bourgeois private property,
the CFLA Statement leaves the door open for the recuperation,
exploitation, and eventual erasure of Indigenous property and ownership
relations by the single, overarching institution of capitalist property.

Why do I think this will happen? Because it's precisely what happened in
Europe with the development of capitalism. As capitalism spread, it
either coopted or destroyed alternative property relationships
(including, but not limited to, communal property), destroying the
sovereignty of communities, and allowing only the outward manifestations
of culture to survive, as long as these did not challenge the
fundamental private property relations of capitalist Europe. To my mind,
the only hope of maintaining and protecting Indigenous knowledge,
culture, and ownership relations is by combating the dominance of
capitalist relations. If not, if First Nations, M&eacute;tis, and Inuit
peoples adopt - as the Canadian government would love them to -
"Indigeneity plus commodity production", this will quickly turn into
"capitalism with Indigenous characteristics". Only the outward
manifestations of culture and society that do not challenge the economic
basis will be allowed by the State. In this sense, then, I believe that
there is a fundamental coincidence between Indigenous sovereignty and
anti-capitalism.

To make this argument a little more concrete, let's talk about land,
which is recognized as one of, if not *the most* significant aspect of
Indigenous sovereignty claims. From the perspective I've laid out above,
land sovereignty - in addition to its social and cultural importance -
is a requirement for the maintenance of all the different kinds of
Indigenous economic relationships. As such, it provides a *direct*
challenge to the dominance of capitalism promoted and protected by the
Federal government. This is why government or private control over the
land has been such an important aspect of Federal policy for so long. First, it
gained control over sovereign territories through treaties (which, to my
mind, it never had any intention to honour), then it cleared much of the
land of making way for European and immigrant settlement as well as
future development. And finally, when push really comes to shove, the
government has not been above using its monopoly of the use of force to
protect capitalist private property rights -  when I was a kid, the most important event in
this category was the Oka 'crisis' of 1990. More recently, we have
seen Indigenous sovereignty claims ignored in the case of the
Trans-Mountain pipeline. The government has been careful (so far) in
not being seen to use force against Indigenous activists protesting the
pipeline, but when it comes down to a choice between Kinder-Morgan and
an Indigenous economic challenge, the government will bring out its 
goons. We saw this at Standing Rock and other NODAPL protests last year.

Anyway, all this to say that my critique of the CFLA statement was not
intended to minimize the importance of Indigenous knowledge protection
or conceptions of ownership, simply that by tacitly presuming the
validity of bourgeois property rights (which the Copyright Act
represents), the door is left open for the *re-colonization* of that
knowledge and those conceptions by capitalist social, economic, and
political relations. If we want our society to really change - and
change in this case must include a meaningful reconciliation - then we
must fundamentally transform the property and production relationships
forced upon us all by capitalism. Otherwise we will always be stuck
beneath the exploitation and domination of capitalism, which will always
be worse for Indigenous peoples than for Settlers.

To conclude, I want to answer one of the questions I was (tacitly) asked
on Twitter: what solutions would I propose? In the first place, I don't
think that any solutions are possible within a capitalist context.
Reconciliation and sovereignty are impossible under capitalist
conditions of production. So we have to challenge those conditions. In
the meantime, however, I've come around to left-wing strategies that
came to the fore in Italian workerism, and especially its feminist wing.
As Italian workers began to recognize that capitalist domination did not
*only* exist within the factory, but in society at large, they expanded
their notion of factory sabotage to the broader society. Factory
sabotage, sometimes as subtly as slowing down an assembly line, was a
way to challenge capitalist domination and cut into capitalist profits.
Outside the factory, the self-reduction of prices (bus fares, for
example, or the amount paid for an item in a chain grocery store) and
other forms of small-scale challenge to bourgeois private property,
became widespread. We can and should be doing this with respect to
Copyright. And before people get upset at the idea that I'm advocating
breaking the law, I will just say this: *we are already doing it*.
Librarians, faced with an article their institution doesn't have a
license for, will often ask someone at another institution for a copy.
This is small potatoes *but it violates capitalist property relations*.
We should keep doing it. And we should do more things like it (like the
quiet waiving of fines, for example). Yes, there are legal options like Interlibrary
Loan, and there are options which appear to be illegal on a mass scale
(like SciHub). But if we want eventually to challenge capitalism on a
larger scale, we need to get comfortably challenging, subverting, and
violating it on a smaller scale first.
