---
layout: post
title: Books in Review 2018
date: 2018-12-20
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Last year, I resolved - as a chronic book non-finisher - to finish
reading as many books as I could. I didn't particularly succeed at that,
but I did manage to slog through some books to the end that I would
ordinarily have given up on. This year, partly because I relaxed my
resolution, and partly because I was doing a lot of "reading around"
(articles, book chapters, sections), as part of my PhD planning, not
only did I not read as many books to completion, but what I *did* finish
were mainly relatively light distractions from the political theory I
was concentrating on. Since I've been on research leave since August,
I've also done a lot of writing, which contributes both to not reading
quite as much, and reading a lot more lighter fiction as a way to unwind
at the end of the day. Also, as opposed to last year, I didn't resolve
to write a review of each book I finished. I've therefore included some
brief notes on each book here. I realize how many of these books are
written by white men - I obviously have more to think about here.

Total books read: 24 (7 non-fiction; 17 fiction) This is only slightly down from 27
books read last year, but the breakdown is quite different. Last year, the majority were non-fiction (16
non-fiction; 11 fiction).

Emily Bront&euml;, *Wuthering Heights*.

I *really* enjoyed this. Perhaps like most people, I inherited a lot of
reading prejudices from my parents, and one of these was an antipathy
towards the Bront&euml;s. It didn't help that what I had picked up over
the years about *Wuthering Heights* was that it was a Victorian romance
novel - which is about as far from the truth as you can get. This is a
wild ride: raw and violent and exceedingly modern. The people who live
in and around Wuthering Heights are not genteel; even Jane Austen's most
despicable characters (i.e. everyone in *Mansfield Park*) hide it
through gentility; in *Wuthering Heights* there's no hiding how terrible
most of the people in it are. At the same time, the novel seems to be
precisely about how conditions of violence, cruelty, racism, and
intolerance reproduce themselves from generation to generation.

E.M. Forster, *A Room with a View*.

This one was a bit slight. It was entertaining enough, but it didn't
really seem to add up to much.

Chester Brown, *Louis Riel*.

This graphic novel biography of Riel was really big when it first came
out in 2003, but I passed over it at the time. It was OK, but neither
the artwork nor the writing particularly did it for me. Again, it didn't
particularly offer anything of significance to the bare facts of Riel's
resistance, trial, and exectution.

Jeff Vandermeer, *Annihilation*. 

I read this after seeing the movie, and because people whose taste in
books I respect really like the whole trilogy. Again, it was fine, but
didn't do much for me. I have yet to read the second volume.

James Baldwin, *Giovanni's Room*

This one was interesting for a number of reasons. I love reading
Baldwin's essays - there's something about Baldwin's language and turn
of phrase that makes his writing really compelling even before you turn
to the ideas he is expressing. Additionally, it was interesting to read
what is essentially a Parisian ex-pat novel of the generation after,
say, Henry Miller. The bloom is off the sexual rose by this time, and
the whole story has a shadow cast over it that has little to do with the
execution that lies at its heart.

Henry Miller, *Quiet Days in Clichy* (re-read).

Miller-Lite, if you like. A short novella covering a lot of the same
ground as *Tropic of Cancer*, but with a certain darkness or nostalgia
that I find a bit more interesting.

Will Eisner, *A Contract with God*.

Now *this* to me shows what graphic storytelling can do. Every page of
artwork is stirring in a way that I found Chester Brown's was not. It's
as if the drawing is in complete harmony with the text, supporting,
reinforcing, and adding nuance and context to it. In the frame I've
included below, the rain and the old man seem to flow together until you
don't know where one ends and the other begins, giving the whole thing a
sense of eternal endless dreariness. The simple text ("... after all,
this was the day Frimme Hersh buried Rachele, his daughter") lets the
image do most of the heavy lifting, allowing the text itself to make a
virtue of its simplicity. The whole volume was fantastic to read.

<img src="/assets/images/eisner.jpg">

Philip K. Dick. *The Divine Invasion*.

Part of Dick's *Valis* trilogy (with *Valis* and *The Transmigration of
Timothy Archer*, which I still have to read) and connected to the
posthumously published *Radio Free Albemuth*, *The Divine Invasion* is
Dick's attempt to come to terms in fiction with the psycho-religious
experiences that began in 1974, and which he poured into his *Exegesis*.
What Dick actually thinks happened to him is not particularly clear, but
it's connected to a lot of the themes of his earlier fiction (the
unstable nature of reality and our perceptions of it; a manichean view
of good and evil, with our reality the creation of a devil or demiurge;
the sense of struggle against evil unseen forces controlling the
world...). Not up to the standards of *Man in the High Castle* or *A
Scanner Darkly*, but fun to read nonetheless.

Robert Cormier, *The Chocolate War* (re-read).

I took some time this year to revisit writers I really liked as a kid.
Cormier was always a writer who a) described a world of violence,
cruelty, and intolerance that seemed much more real than a lot of other
YA work at the time and b) didn't condescend or sugarcoat anything for
kids (see, for example, the horrific *Fade*). I think in some ways this
is the appeal of Stephen King to a lot of teenagers (at least, this was
true when I was in high school), but Cormier's books are always firmly
grounded in the real world.

Ursula K. LeGuin, *The Dispossessed*.

Le Guin died in January, and so many people I knew were talking about
how much her writing meant to them, that I wondered why I had completely
ignored her, even in my heaviest science-fiction phase. I was given a
copy of *Always Coming Home* for Christmas when I was 12 or 13, but I
couldn't get into it - the ethnographic element was too dry for me. A
few years later I read *The Left Hand of Darkness*, but didn't feel
compelled to read anything else. *The Dispossessed* is really great
politically - it's easy to see how it's become an anarchist favourite -
and I enjoyed reading it, but it still seemed to be missing
something...? Anyway, I will read more to figure that out (I should
probably reread *Left Hand* first).

Ian Fleming, *Casino Royale* (re-read).

This was just entertainment, something to read to clear Italian Marxist
theory out of my head. I have a soft spot for the James Bond books
because I grew up with them, but I wouldn't recommend them to anyone (it
will be interesting see whether Bond holds any kind of fascination for
my nephews as they get older).

Michel Tremblay, *Th&eacute;r&egrave; et Pierrette &agrave;
l'&eacute;cole des Saints-Anges*.

Slowly working my way through Michel Trembley's *Chroniques du Plateau
Mont-Royal*, this is book two of six. I read the first volume last year
(*La grosse femme d'&agrave; cot&eacute; est enceinte*) and absolutely
loved it - there's a humanity to Tremblay married to amazing writing
(both technically and stylistically) that manages to turn what seem on
the face of it to be fairly prosaic accounts of working-class Montreal
life into full and rich portraits of the development of real people.
This second installment of the chronicles is just as good. I
find it slow to read novels in French in Edmonton, when I'm not
surrounded by *la francophonie* (I don't have this problem in Montreal),
but hopefully I'll make it through another of Tremblay's books in 2019.

Andreas Malm, *The Progress of this Storm: Nature and Society in a
Warming World*.

A critique of different strands of contemporary social theory with
respect to climate change and a compelling defense of historical
materialism (Marxism) as the social theory we need right now. Highly
recommended.

Kurt Vonnegut, *Slaughterhouse Five*.

I have been trying to read Vonnegut for years. A lot of people whose
opinion I respect really get a lot out of him, but every time I tried to
read him it all just felt too light, too frothy. I'm afraid
*Slaughterhouse Five*, now that I've read the whole thing, is just more
of the same. How do you make the firebombing of Dresden - an event which
*clearly* deeply marked Vonnegut's mind and emotions - seem... trivial?
Maybe it's just me - I don't really get Vonnegut's schtick. So it goes.

Maurizio Lazzarato, *The Making of Indebted Man*.

I read this as part of my PhD research. Very interesting, if a little
slight - if you want to understand the financial crisis and the current
culture of debt from a Marxist perspective, this is a worthwhile
contribution.

Alan Garner, *Elidor* (re-read).

Another re-read from my childhood. I remembered *Elidor* being better
than it was. It's a darker, more working-class version of the Narnia
idea, but it doesn't really seem to pull it off. Garner's *The Owl
Service* is one of the best YA fantasy books I've ever read, but this
one doesn't live up to the memory I had of it, unfortunately.

Monica Hughes, *The Keeper of the Isis Light* (re-read).

I must have read all of Hughes' science-fiction when I was a kid (at
least, all that she had written up to that point - she kept publishing
until 2002). I even enjoyed her non-SF work (*My Name is Paula Popowich*
and *Blaine's Way* especially). This one really lived up to what I
remembered about it (which turned out to be more about setting and
character than plot). It's a bit dated now, but still worth reading; I
have the other two books (*The Guardian of Isis* and *The Isis Pedlar*)
in an omnibus volume from Edmonton Public Library, so I'll try to read
those again soon.

Philip K. Dick, *The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch*.

Apparently Dick thought that with this and *Martian Time Slip* he
finally managed to figure out and pull off what he wanted to do in
science fiction. Not as good as *Man in the High Castle* and very
similar to *Ubik* - definitely worth reading for an introduction to
Dick's style and concerns.

C.S. Lewis, *Mere Christianity*.

Not having grown up religious at all, I'm interested in religions. This
book is (apparently) one of the classics of Christian apologetics. I
hated it. It was distasteful, intellectually dishonest, condescending,
and the arguments didn't hold water - at least, not from this side of
the 20th century. I find it hard to believe that Lewis could not see the
changes taking place in English society during and after the war;
instead, he held to a white, patriarchal, aristocratic image of English
Christianity that was never particularly accurate and nowadays seems
dangerously archaic. If contemporary Christians are taking this as an
example of apologetics (it continues to regularly make Christian "best
book" lists), then no wonder it's in such trouble.

Philip K. Dick, *Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep* (re-read).

This one starts out in classic (or typical) Dick style, but then becomes
something else, something darker with more to say about human beings'
interior emotional lives as opposed to the the relationship between
perception and reality. Apparently Dick wrote it in response to first
person accounts written by Nazi guards in concentration camps which he
read while researching *Man in the High Castle*. One of the constants in
Dick's writing is his very humanist empathy; in reading the guards'
accounts, Dick could not understand how human beings could
feel/think/behave so inhumanly - he felt that perhaps they weren't human
at all, and so the idea of exploring the *emotional* distinctions
between human and android was born.


Patrick Malcolmson, Richard Myers, Gerald Baier, and Thomas M.J.
Bateman, *The Canadian Regime: An Introduction to Parliamentary
Government in Canada*, Sixth Edition.

This is more of a textbook than anything else, but I read it cover to
cover quite quickly. It's really good on covering the details of
Canadian government (what's the difference between "responsible
government" in Canada and "separation of powers" in the US?). It seems
pretty exhaustive, and up to date (it covers the 2015 election, and goes
into a decent amount of detail regarding the debate over proportional
representation, for example). It's interesting to read this as a
Marxist, though, because the liberal presumptions and biases stick out
like a sore thumb. Still, better to be transparent about that kind of
thing than to appeal to some kind of neutrality.

Raymond Geuss, *Philosophy and Real Politics*.

I had heard of Geuss before, but I decided to read this based on a
series of lectures on Nietzsche that he gave in 2013, which I found
really informative (they're up on YouTube). This book lays out the
principles for "realism" in political philosophy, countering realism to
various kinds of unrealistic theorizing - Geuss uses Nozick's anarchism
and Rawls' theory of justice as examples of this - and makes the case
for not relying on abstractions ("rights", "justice", "democracy") when
talking about politics, but actually looking at what people do in
particular conjunctions. I'll need to re-read this to make sense of it
properly, but it helped clarify a bunch of things that had been floating
through my mind.

Peter MacKinnon, *University Commons Divided*.

Basically lays out the hegemonic liberal conception of academic freedom,
using a set of case studies from the last few years. Nothing particulary
new here - I have a CJAL review forthcoming.

Raymond Geuss, *Public Goods, Private Goods*

Geuss continues his critique of liberalism by performing a "genealogy"
of the concept of public and private. Looking first at three historical
case studies (Diogenes of Sinope, Caesar, and St. Augustine) and the
different ways they conceived of and problematized the distinction
between the public and the private, Geuss moves on to critiquing liberal
views of a *unitary* dividing line between the two (looking specifically
at Mill and Dewey). In the end, Geuss' realist view is that deciding on
a theoritically singular (and likely abstract) dividing line and then making political
decisions gets things the wrong way around: we need to decide what
concrete context private/public is necessary for, and then build on that
basis. A very short book, but quite interesting.
