---
layout: post
title: Wuthering Heights
date: 2018-01-10
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Emily Bront&euml;, *Wuthering Heights*, (Heron Books, 1966) [1847/1850]

>Wuthering Heights is a strange sort of book,â€”baffling all regular
>criticism; yet, it is impossible to begin and not finish it; and quite
>as impossible to lay it aside afterwards and say nothing about it.
-- Douglas Jerrold's Weekly Newspaper, January 15 1848.

Well, this was a surprise. I've been trying to get my head around
"literary criticism" lately - having managed to avoid it throughout all
my years of schooling - and I had picked up a couple of weeks ago a copy
of Terry Eagleton's *Myths of Power: A Marxist Study of the
Bront&euml;s*. I was interested in what his Marxist criticism would look
like, but I hadn't read any of the Bront&euml;s before. Partly, I think
this was due to a general lack of sympathy for any novel written between
Jane Austen and, say, Joyce; I was pretty sure I knew what kind of novel
*Wuthering Heights* must be - Romantic, clich&eacute;ed and not as good
as Austen. To tell the truth, there was probably something of an
anti-Bront&euml; prejudice I inherited from my father. At any rate, when
I saw a decent hardcover edition in my local Wee Book Inn, I picked it
up.

Reader, I couldn't put it down. Jerrold's newspaper has it right: it's
been a long time since I was so invested in a novel from page one. Not
only does Emily Bront&euml; know how to keep her pot boiling, but the
world she creates is so weird, so strange, so violent, that you have no
choice but to keep reading if you want to make any sense of it.

According to the Wikipedia article, initial reviews were not kind to
*Wuthering Heights* - the violence, the seeming amorality, the
complexity of the characters all made the novel seemingly intractable to
the criticism of the time. I think, too, there's something else afoot
here. *Wuthering Heights* is not, I think, a *realistic* novel in the
sense that, say, *Pride and Prejudice* or *Middlemarch* are. But it's
unrealism is not sentimental and moralizing, like Dickens', so it makes
sense that critics at the time might have had difficulty with it. I
don't think readers would have had difficulty with it at all - it must
count as one of the most readable novels of the Victorian period!

Strangely, it reminded me a lot of Steinbeck's *East of Eden* - another
novel I put off for a long time but ended up loving. Bront&euml;'s
characters are, so
to speak, modern archetypes in the same way that Steinbeck's are. The
interlocking pairs of characters, the multigenerational struggles, the
circumscribed society, even the name and complexity of "Cathy" are
shared between the two books. Steinbeck's is perhaps more explicitly
biblical, but *Wuthering Heights* shares a certain Old Testament
ruggedness and violence. Neither are "Good Christian Books" in the New
Testament sense. Both books exist in a world where "an eye for an eye"
takes precedence over "turning the other cheek".

Anyway, there's much to digest here, a lot to think about and chew on. I
look forward to reading it again in a couple of years.
