---
layout: post
title: Grants and the Debt Economy
date: 2018-10-18
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

The other day the results of the [National Heritage Digitization
Strategy](https://nhds.ca/) funding competition [were
announced](https://nhds.ca/2018/10/16/national-heritage-digitization-strategy-21-projects-approved-for-funding-across-canada/),
and it got me thinking about the place of grant-funding in librarianship
and in academia more broadly. When I was applying for a PhD at
University of Alberta last year, it was *presumed* that I would apply
for SSHRC funding for it - indeed, disclosing SSHRC funding is a key
component of the application process. Going after available funding is
considered "common sense" in academia. To argue that, as a full-time,
tenured, salaried professional, any grant funding should go to someone
else goes against this common sense; when I mentioned the idea to
faculty members, I might as well have been speaking Greek. More and
more, grant funding is becoming a core part of library practitioner
research as well, to the extent that we have training sessions on how to
apply for and manage external funding.

This reminded me of when I worked for AT&T in my 20s. AT&T brought in
private life- and health-insurance which you could not opt out of unless
you provided proof of coverage through another private insurer. This was
in Manitoba, a province with universal public health insurance.
Arguments that, because one was covered by the public insurer, one
should not have to sign up for public insurance were disregarded.

The connection between these two examples became clear while reading
Maurizio Lazzarato's *The Making of the Indebted Man*, in which he
argues that neoliberalism has created a society in which the
debtor-creditor relation is the primary power relation. Because of the
financialization of neoliberal society - the securitization of
everything, including risk and debt - more and more people have to be
enrolled in the relationship (as debtors, obviously). This explains the
easy enrollment of undergraduates into credit card debt, but it also
explains why the *model* of all economic exchanges is the debt
relationship
(as opposed to other kinds of economic relationship). Grant funding is
modeled on a debt-credit relationship, along with everything else.

Lazzarato further argues that the debt relationship *creates* the kinds
of people who will keep the debt economy going: people who live the kind
of responsible lifestyle that will allow them to repay their debts,
people for whom *not* paying off their debts is seen and felt as a moral
and personal failing, people who are trained to follow all of the rules
required to *prove* their trustworthiness in matters of debt repayment.
Obviously, shame at not repaying a debt applies only to workers, not
capitalists, for whom either bankruptcy or national bail-out remain
viable alternatives.

One might argue, however, that one doesn't repay a grant. Lazzarato's
argument - using employment insurance as an example - is that 

>Unlike what happens on financial markets, the beneficiary as 'debtor' is not expected to reimburse in actual money but rather in conduct, attitudes, ways of behaving, plans, subjective commitments, the time devoted to finding a job, the time used for conforming oneself to the criteria dictated by the market and business, etc.

Not only does one have to be the kind of person who knows how to follow
the instructions required to *apply* for funding (and here we come up
against the perennial debates in librarianship on professionalism,
class,
race, and gender), to *convince* the funding agency of one's worthiness
to receive and hold their credit, but one also also has to be the kind
of person who will tailor their life, work, and behaviour to the
reporting requirements of the agency. Grant funding becomes a form of
biopolitical control, constraining the range of decision-making, choice,
response, and agency of debtors through the very mechanism of credit.

It is precisely at these "obvious" points of "common sense" (why not
have someone else pay for your work?) that we become most tightly
enrolled in the system of domination of financial capitalism, that we
become forced to adjust our very subjectivity to conform to the
requirements of exploitation and dehumanization. Therefore, it is
precisely these obvious points of common sense that we have to
challenge, even if it's hard for anyone to understand the challenge. As
Dostoyevsky argued in *Notes from Underground*, the right to "go against
our own interest and profit", as perverse as it seems, is one of the most fundamental rights of a
human being.
