---
layout: post
title: Update
date: 2018-09-09
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

I'm not sure anyone will be interested in this, and it feels a little
narcissistic to write this post, but I wanted to capture what's
currently going on in my life.

As of August 1, 2018, I have gone on a one-year research leave from
University of Alberta Libraries. I recognize not only the *huge*
privilege I have of being able to take such a leave, but also the
struggles of previous generations of workers to a) have "librarian"
recognized as an academic position and b) to have research leaves
included as part of the librarian collective agreement at University of
Alberta libraries. If you're interested in the history of academic
librarianship and labour in Canada, I highly recommend *In Solidarity:
Academic Librarian Labour Activism and Union Participation in Canada*,
edited by Jennifer Dekker and Mary Kandiuk (Sacramento: Library Juice
Press, 2014).

What am I doing on this research leave? I have two main projects and a
few smaller ones on the go.

* I'm working on a book for Library Juice which is going to be a Marxist
  critique of the mainstream liberal discourse of librarianship.I've
been working on it since March, and the manuscript is due next March
(2019). I guess publication date will depend on how much needs to be
done to the manuscript after that part. Things are going well, and I'm
working on it steadily.
* I've been accepted into a part-time, distance learning research PhD
  programme in the School of Government and Society at University of
Birmingham (Department of Political Science and International
Relations). My research project will look at "Italian Theory" (primarily
autonomist Marxism) and Knowledge Representation in Artificial
Intelligence, with an application to financial technology. The details
of the empirical part of the project still need to be worked out, but
I'll be spending two weeks in Birmingham at the beginning of October for
induction into the programme.

In terms of smaller, but still significant, projects, I've submitted a
poetry manuscript to the University of Alberta Press, and I'm working on
an article for *Library Trends* on immaterial labour and academic
librarianship, which will build on my reading in Italian marxism. I'm
not hugely hopeful about the poetry, but we'll see what happens. I also
have a couple of presentations on the horizon. The first is for (my
first ever) OLA Superconference, where I'll be presenting a critique of
the discourse of democracy in librarianship. The second - and something
I'm really excited for - is a presentation as part of a conference in
Winnipeg on the 100th anniversary of the 1919 strike, in May of next
year.

I think part of the reason for setting out these projects in this update
is to keep myself honest. Now that I've put them out there, they need to
get done.
