---
layout: post
title: Tronti, "Marx Yesterday and Today"
date: 2018-09-20
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

As part of my PhD research, I'm investigating what's become known as
'Autonomist Marxism', a Marxist tendency that grew out of workers'
struggles and theoretical positions outside the Communist Party in Italy
in the 1960s. In its early days, this tendency was known as *operaismo*
(usually translated as "workerism"), and its leading theoreticians were
Romano Alquati, Raniero Panziero, and Mario Tronti. In the early 1970,
the movement split and evolved into a loose agglomeration of
"extra-parliamentary" (and sometimes violent) groups under the umbrella
term *autonomia operaia* (Workers' Autonomy). The best-known figure of this tendency is, arguably,
Antonio Negri. The idea of "workers' autonomy" comes from the idea,
based on a particular reading of Chapter 10 of *Capital*, the
*Grundrisse*, and the unpublished sixth chapter of *Capital*, that the
working class, far from being structurally determined by capital, has
its own autonomy, its own agency. In this view, technical innovations
carried out by capital are part of a *political* as well as an economic
attempt to subdue the autonomous power of workers' struggle. For Negri,
the development of capital is a continuing attempt to free itself from
the power of labour.

One of, if not *the* most important text of the early years of
*operaismo* is Mario Tronti's *Operai e capitale* (Workers and Capital)
of 1966. This is a collection of essays that Tronti wrote for the
newspapers of the early workerist movement. Despite its importance in
the history of Italian Marxism, and despite the rise, in recent years of
an "Italian Theory" comparable to the "French Theory" of the 1960-80s,
*Operai e capitale* has never been fully translated into English. I need
to read it as part of my research project, so I thought I might try my
hand at translating some of it.

The first essay in the book, "Marx Yesterday and Today", interrogates
the relationship between Marxism as an analysis of contemporary
capitalism and as a critique of ideology - *all* ideology, including the
reformist ideologies of the workers' movement as well as vulgar Marxism.
In this essay, Tronti lays out in ideological terms the autonomy of the
workers from capital.

I'm not a professional translator, and there are some areas where
Tronti's tricky prose was probably beyond my capacity, but I think this
translations gets the gist of Tronti's argument across.

[Read the Translation Here (pdf)](/assets/docs/Tronti_Marx_Yesterday_and_Today.pdf)
