---
layout: post
title: Truth and Consequences
date: 2019-10-17
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

One of the consequences of beginning to think seriously about society
and politics in the early to mid 1990s is that, because theories like
Marxism had been cast on the dustbin of history, and it we had seen the
"end of ideology", the hegemonic philosophy of the time was a neoliberal
orthodoxy mystified by postmodernism (as the [cultural logic of late
capitalism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Postmodernism,_or,_the_Cultural_Logic_of_Late_Capitalism)).
Due to that and an early reading of Nietzsche, I took on many of the
postmodern assumptions, which I have in the intervening years walked
back as a result of my deeper reading in Marxism. However, one of the
takeaways from postmodernism that I think is worth saving - and this
puts me at odds, probably, with Marxist-Leninists for example - is the
idea that transhistorical abstractions (truth, intellectual freedom,
etc.) must not be privileged over material realities (lives, bodies,
wellbeing, flourishing, etc.). The dominant library position on
intellectual freedom, as we can see in the current TPL controversy, is
precisely such a privileging: in TPL's view, an abstraction like
"intellectual freedom" takes precedence over the lives, bodies,
wellbeing, and flourishing of transgender people.

Raymond Geuss, in his "Philosophy and Real Politics" has criticized this
kind if privileging of abstraction, which he associates, as do I, with a
particularly pernicious tendency of liberalism towards paternalism:
liberal institutions (parliament, public libraries) do not see
themselves as part of their communities, but as transcending them, setting
themselves up as guardians of truths and values that we community
members are too young, or ignorant, or crypto-totalitarian to understand
and support. This position was on display yesterday in Vickery Bowles'
interview with CBC radio, where she argued that civil society had no
business sanctioning anything: protecting values was the prerogative of
the police and the courts. I have already written on the tensions within
the intellectual freedom position between constituent and constituted
power, and such a contradiction is on full display here.

However, despite the fact that "suspicion of grand narratives"
(abstractions) is a hallmark of what Lyotard calls "the postmodern
condition", I think that such a position can be found in Marx himself.
In *The German Ideology* he argues against the idealism of the Young
Hegelians, who suppose that the ills of the world are just a matter of
not holding the right ideas, rather than the immmediate effects of real
inequalities and oppressions. This is the idealism of public libraries
who hold that if critics just *understood* the concept of intellectual
freedom, the value of debate, and the marketplace of ideas, then the
world would eventually be rid of the kind of intolerance exemplified by
transphobic speakers and the alt-right. Marx argues that more knowledge,
better understanding, or more adequate ideas were not enough to dislodge
the entrenched power relations (economic, social, political) of a given
society. Instead, what was required was material resistance leading,
eventually, to a revolution in the name of the whole community.

Elsewhere, in a draft text of 1857, he argues that abstractions have a
particular place in our understanding of society:

>It seems to be correct to begin with the real and the concrete, with
>the real precondition, thus to begin, in economics, with e.g. the
>population, which is the foundation and the subject of the entire
>social act of production. However, on closer examination this proves
>false. The population is an abstraction if I leave out, for example,
>the classes of which it is composed. These classes in turn are an empty
>phrase if I am not familiar with the elements on which they rest. E.g.
>wage labour, capital, etc. These latter in turn presuppose exchange,
>division of labour, prices, etc. For example, capital is nothing
>without wage labour, without value, money, price etc. Thus, if I were
>to begin with the population, this would be a chaotic conception
>[Vorstellung] of the whole, and I would then, by means of further
>determination, move analytically towards ever more simple concepts
>[Begriff], from the imagined concrete towards ever thinner abstractions
>until I had arrived at the simplest determinations. From there the
>journey would have to be retraced until I had finally arrived at the
>population again, but this time not as the chaotic conception of a
>whole, but as a rich totality of many determinations and relations... 

What Marx is saying here is that by thinking of intellectual freedom
(for example) as a real thing rather than an abstraction, the rich materiality of people's
lives is lost, obscured, mystified. This oversimplified abstraction then
tends to be pressed into the service of the status quo (i.e.
intolerance, exploitation, domination). His own method, he argues,
begins by recognizing the abstract nature of something like intellectual
freedom and
then proceeds to analyze the things that compose it. Eventually, his
method gets down to the atomic realities that build up to form the
whole, reconstructing the thing again this time not as an unmoored
abstraction, but as a "rich totality" of the lives, values,
relationships, etc, that make it up.

When I spoke in a previous blog post on the need to have a different,
larger, conception of intellectual freedom, one that recognizes the
dialectical interrelationships between intellectual freedom and social
responsibility, it is Marx's method that I'm thinking of. The abstract
idea on which Meghan Murphy relies, that of all transwomen as violent
offenders, is denied by the very real lives, personalities, situations,
and dynamics of oppression in which trans people live. The abstraction
in this case, as Marx argued, does real violence to the real people who
are supposedly covered by it. This should not be news: I was a boy in
the early 1980s, it was "common knowledge" that gay men were child molesters - a horrific thing to suggest. This kind
of evil, oppressive abstraction which lies at the heart of
anti-semitism, misogyny, homomisia and transmisia erases the lived
reality of all the people it claims to describe. 

The privileging of "truth" over real experience is still widepread: we
see it in MRAs arguing about 'logic', we see it in the writers and
artists who are exposed as valuing their art over the people they hurt,
we see it in teachers who hold to some abstract "scholarship" or
"science" (or "western civilisation") rather than engage meaningfully with people's lives. We saw it in the late Harold Bloom. And we
see it in public libraries who privilege "neutrality", "free speech",
"security", and "both-sidesism" over the very real fact that people are
dying and the world is burning. It was this privileging of "truth" (as
"civilisation") over people's lives that led to the residential school
system, though history is not short of further examples. We have to
challenge this privileging of truth and abstraction if we are to live up
to Marx's maxim that society must foster "the free development of
each as a condition of the free development of all". Excluding any group
of people from this vision, as TPL is currently exluding transgender people, must be challenged and prevented.
