---
layout: post
title: Community, Value, and Worth
date: 2019-10-13
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

>In English writers of the seventeenth century we still often find the
>word 'worth' used for use-value and 'value' for exchange-value. This is
>quite in accordance with the spirit of a language that likes to use a
>Teutonic word for the actual thing, and a Romance word for its
>reflection. Marx, Capital, Volume 1.

Here we go again. Late last week, people noticed that the same
[transphobic speaker](https://globalnews.ca/news/4717899/vpl-meghan-murphy/) who spoke at Vancouver Public Library earlier this year is scheduled to speak at Toronto Public Library as well. In the midst of pushback against the room-booking, Vancouver Public issued a [statement](/assets/images/vpl-statement.png) (now gone from their website - that's some great information management, VPL) making three fundamental claims:

1. VPL is only renting the space; they don't endorse the speaker or the
   statements mmade.
2. VPL cares deeply about its community, especially LGBTQ2S+ community.
3. Intellectual freedom is one of VPL's core values and trumps all other
   considerations ("the fundamental role of libraries as a place for
free expression and intellectual freedom must be upheld.")

Now, we can leave aside the question of endorsement: those who live by
the brand die by the brand, in other words, libraries can't expect the
public to associate the library with events put on in their spaces
("hosted" or not) only when it suits them. If you foster a connection
between, say, the public library's image and [one set of
speakers](https://www.epl.ca/speaker-series/) you have to expect the
public to make the same connection between the library and other kind of
speakers. What's fascinating to me here - and extremely troubling - is
that while public libraries seem to expect the public to intuitively
understand when a particular speaker is not speaking on behalf of or
with the support of the library, they insist on vetting presentations
made by their own workers, or policing their speech for fear they might
be mistaken for representing the library, thus denying them their own intellectual freedom
in order to protect their image. At best this is cognitive dissonance,
at worst it is hypocrisy. There is, however, a political economy aspect
of this as well. The idea that a "third party rental" is merely a
cash/exchange relationship - a contract - and therefore carries no
social, political, or moral charge, is a precept of capitalism in
general and neoliberal capitalism in particular. What the library
doesn't understand is that while it is operating firmly in the mode
of a value-free exchange relationship, the human community of which
it is a part sees things very differently indeed.

In terms of community support, this is upheld by VPL's own set of [core
values](https://www.vpl.ca/about), which includes "community-led
planning" and "community partnerships". "Intellectual freedom" is in the
same list, but there is no indication that it carries more weight or
takes priority over the others. Why then, do public libraries prioritize
intellectual freedom over community when conflicts between these values
arise? This is the heart of the third claim, for the absolute hegemony
of "intellectual freedom" over all other considerations.

Fast forward a few months, and Toronto city librarian
Vickery Bowles is reading from the same script in her statement about
[the same
speaker](https://torontopubliclibrary.typepad.com/news_releases/2019/10/statement-from-city-librarian-on-room-rental-event.html)
booking space at Toronto Public Library. 

>Intellectual freedom is one of the core values of public libraries, and we promote freedom of expression in our collections, programs and services. We cannot deny access to a room rental on the basis of views that the third-party holds if the request meets criteria set out in our policy. The event organizers are also contractually obligated not to violate the policy. As always, we will be prepared to take immediate action should any room rental contravene the law or our policies. 

Intellectual freedom, contract, policy: these are the hallmarks of
liberal-bourgeois thinking. What is significant here is that, as many
people have already pointed out, Toronto Public Library's policy
*already* allows them to refuse a hall rental on the basis of
discriminatory views. This change to the policy was made after the last
time this came up, when TPL rented a room to [a bunch of
nazis](https://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/toronto-library-board-revising-room-booking-policy-after-controversial-memorial-1.3717385)
to hold a memorial service. Clearly, the library's insistence on
maximalist intellectual freedom and contract trumps even its own policies.

>We uphold the principles of intellectual freedom, but at the same time are deeply committed to equity and diversity. Allowing a room booking does not imply we endorse or support the views expressed. We are strong supporters of the LGBTQ2S+ community within TPL and the communities we serve.

Note the "but". Toronto Public has the same problem with conflicting
values that Vancouver Public does. Note also the is/ought elision when
the statement claims "we are strong supporters of the LGBTQS+
commmunity". How honest is that support when a bourgeois conception of
intellectual freedom and the sanctity of contract immediately overrides
it? As I've mentioned before, when library values are abandoned at the
first obstacle, then they are meaningless.

What I find most worrisome about Bowles' restatement of the VPL position
is not that they are so fundamentally similar: public librarians share
the same professional and political education, and their libraries serve
the same role as apparatus of the state, so it is unsurprising that they
should share views. But in that case, why has TPL not learned from the
VPL experience? VPL, after many years working to gain the support and
trust of marginalized communities in Vancouver destroyed those
relationships at one stroke. As a result Vancouver Pride banned VPL from
participating as an organization. Toronto Public Library seems to pride
itself on its support of Toronto's LGBTQ2S+ community; how shocked are
they going to be when they too are banned from participating in Pride?
Because if chief librarians of public libraries don't learn from each
other, I'm fairly certain that Pride organizers do.

We (libraries) spend a lot of time and energy trying to communicate our
value to our parent instiutions (often a university or a city). Library
administrators respect this relationship because it is an exchange
relationship: we will do the bidding of the neoliberal state in exchange
for budgetary support. Here the sanctity of contract raises its head
again. But we are prepared to abandon any concept of value to our
communities at the first hurdle. The allegiances of the public library
(and the academic library) are to the state, the state that holds the
purse-strings. The library's community - as we have seen at VPL, TPL, in
the security theatre of Winnipeg Public Library, and the pro-cop
"both-sidesism" at Halifax Public - is there to be disciplined,
controlled, dictated to, not
listened to or learned from. This is because the relationship of the
library to its community *cannot* be one of value, but must be one of worth. The
library has *value* to its parent institution, but is supposed to be
*worth something to* (and *worthy of*) its community. Because libraries are
capitalist institutions, they can only understand, subscribe to, and
participate fully in one of these relationships: the relationship of
exchange, or as Marx and Engels put it, the relationship of "callous
cash payment".

I think it would be useful to revive the distinction between *value* and
*worth* in these discussions. Human lives - especially in this instance,
the lives of transgender people - may have no *value* under capitalism
(which is how public libraries get themselves into this mess to begin
with),
but we therefore have to insist on their *worth*. In order for public
libraries to be worth anything to their communities, they have to
demonstrate that their communities are worth something to them.

NOTE: Bowles' statement refers to [this
post](https://cfe.ryerson.ca/blog/2019/08/can-public-libraries-maintain-their-commitment-intellectual-freedom-face-outrage-over)
by Alvin Schrader on IF at the Ryerson Centre for Free Expression. I've
addressed this post previously on [this
site](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2019/08/16/constituent-power-and-intellectual-freedom.html).
