---
layout: post
title: Virtue Ethics and the Coming Crisis
date: 2019-11-21
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Canadian librarianship is heading into a moment of truth/crisis around
intellectual freedom. The events around hosting transphobic speakers at
Vancouver Public Library and Toronto Public Library, accompanied by a
doubling-down on free speech absolutism and a dismissal of critics as
confused, naive, or inexperienced, have exposed deep faultlines within
the profession. However, these events are, I suspect, only the curtain
raiser for a much graver test of our professional values and, indeed, of
the idea of a coherent "profession" as such.

Now that the far-right have figured out that they can gain not only
publicity but the "moral support" (I use the term loosely) of public
libraries, piggybacking on their trustworthiness and the [hegemonic
discourse of libraries as bastions of
democracy](https://litwinbooks.com/books/confronting-the-democratic-discourse-of-librarianship/),
they will undoubtedly continue to follow the same playbook. They will
dupe unwitting public library CEOs into adopting the far-right rhetoric
of free speech (as opposed to intellectual freedom) and they will
benefit from the "neutral" platform the libraries give them.

On the academic side, both Ontario and Alberta have mandated "free
speech" policies, either in the form of adoption of the so-called
["Chicago Principles"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chicago_principles)
or some similar policy developed by the universities themselves. My
colleague Dr. Shama Rangwala has
[critiqued](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-the-real-free-speech-crisis-on-albertas-campuses-might-not-be-what/) the idea of a "free-speech
crisis" on Canadian campuses, writing that "a 'free speech crisis' on
campus is a red herring, and one too often deployed by right-wing
governments around the world, when the real threat is to academic
freedom". In a sentence which applies equally to the academy and to the
defense of free-speech absolutism by public libraries, she notes that
"if indeed all opinions are valid and legitimized, then the university
is reduced to a marketplace of ideas where, for example, white-genocide
theory and theory of evolution are equal commmodities".

(Note that there's something to be said here about the "demarcation
problem", the question of how to tell science from pseudo-science in the
philosophy of science, but that will have to wait for another time).

It was clear in the recent debates over the Toronto Public Library
platforming of a transphobic speaker that both the library systems
themselves and the Canadian library associations were mainly caught
completely off guard. The community response in Toronto was
overwhelming, leading to a large protest at the library branch where the
event was being held. The library responded - to its eternal shame - by
calling the cops into the library and forcibly, illegally detaining
protesters (demonstrating, if any such demonstration were still needed,
the alignment between public libraries and state violence). The ripples
from these events spread throughout the profession, at very public cost
both to our associations and to the community trust in libraries as
public institutions. Brianne Selman
[noted](https://twitter.com/astrobri/status/1191892003954548736?s=20) on
Twitter that the cost of platforming a transphobic speaker at that time
was very high. And all of this came as a total surprise to library
leadership, in the libraries, and in our associations.

What is coming next must not catch us by surprise: after several years of
skirmishes, intellectual freedom is about
to erupt into a Canada-wide battle. Librarians, our associations, and
our administrations need to come up with ways and plans to respond. With
respect to the Chicago Principles mandate, I hope that CAPAL at the very
least is working on something to help academic library workers through
what is bound to be a difficult and contentious period. I have no faith
that CFLA, especially the Intellectual Freedom committee, is prepared to
do anything but rest on the sanctimonious denials that anything is wrong
and that anything should trouble their unwavering belief in bourgeois
intellectual freedom absolutism. Insert "This is Fine" gif here.

===

One thing I've been thinking again about since all of this began, is the question of virtue ethics. I was prepared to write a blog post called "Intellectual Freedom and
Virtue Ethics", but it turned out I [already wrote
it](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2018/09/11/intellectual-freedom-value-ethics.html)
on another intellectual freedom occasion. So this time, I thought I
would take a different tack.

Nafsika Athanassoulis begins her introduction to *Virtue Ethics*
(Bloomsbury, 2013) with a discussion of how virtue ethics came to take
its place within the field of ethics alongside deontology and
consequentialism. In a nutshell, deontology claims that ethics have to
do with process and procedure, essentially prioritizing intent over
outcome. Consequentialism takes the opposite tack and argues that
whether an action is ethical or not depends on its outcome. Generally
speaking, as I noted in the previous blog post, the defenders of
intellectual freedom absolutism take a deontological approach - the
maintenance of the abstract rule of intellectual freedom is ethically
right, no matter what the consequences - while the critics tend to adopt
a consequentialist argument: the defense of IF absolutism leads to real
harm and therefore needs to be rethought/reformulated. I myself have
tended to rely on the consequentialist position in my critique of IF
absolutism, arguing that deontological IF absolutism prioritizes an
abstract *rule* for ethical behaviour at the expense of real people's
lives and wellbeing. Ethics, I have argued, is too complex to be left to
the unquestioning adherence to a simple rule (though this is the basis,
for example, of Kantian ethics).

For Athanassoulis, however, both deontology *and* consequentialism rely
on over-simplified ethical rules: either the intention matters, or the
outcome matters. But, she argues further, this is because both
deontology and consequentialism see ethics as a question of "what to
do?" Both kinds of ethics are meant to help people answer ethical
questions like what they should do in a given situation. These ethical
positions are action-oriented.

Virtue ethics, however, takes a different approach, drawing on
an Aristotelian position that was long disregarded in Western philosophy. Virtue ethics argues that ethical questions do not
take the form of "what should I do?" but "what kind of person should I
be?" Expanding this to libraries, we can say that both deontological and
consequentialist ethics try to shape what actions a library will take
(enshrined, perhaps, in a policy), while a virtue ethics approach would
try to shape what kind of institution a library *is*. Virtue ethics is
not based on the ideas of *rules*, as deontology and consequentialism
are, because rules end up being one-size-fits-all, they are unable to
deal with conflict between one rule and another. This is exactly what we
have seen in the conflict between IF-oriented and community-oriented
library values at VPL and TPL: in a conflict between values, one
abstract rule has to take precendence. Because the deontologists are in
charge of the libraries, the deontological priority (intellectual
freedom) takes precedence over the consequentialist priority
(community). Indeed, this split between deontological intention and
consequentialist outcomes is enshrined in the ALA distinction between
the Office of Intellectual Freedom and the Social Responsibility Round
Table. So long as we have to choose between deontological and
consequentialist ethics, intellectual freedom and social responsibility
will remain incompatible and incommensurable.

Virtue ethics *starts from* the rich, conflictual, complexity of ethical
life. In asking "how should I live my life?" it makes space for the
conflict between values, rules, positions, etc. It does not ask for
unquestioning obedience to an overarching principle; it does not even
ask for coherence, because for virtue ethics the important thing is what
kind of life you are living. You do not take your eyes off either
intentions or consequences, but they take their rightful place within a
larger, more complex moral landscape. These are the questions we need to
ask of our libraries, our associations, and ourselves right now in order to prepare
for the coming crisis.

One reason deontological and consequentialist ethics were, until the
late 1950s, considered the only possible ethical approaches, is because
*rules* and *procedures* conform to the logic of capitalist
exploitation, the *instrumental reason* that sees efficiency and
productivity as the only values. Rules and procedures are great for
making decisions - ethical or otherwise - quickly and with little mess,
but therein lies the problem: ethical questions cannot be properly
decided quickly and easily. They are always going to be messy and
require hard conversations, debates, and conflict. As we saw with the deontological position entrenched at the top of our public libraries and our library associations, abstract ethical positions based on rules don't like to be challenged: they want the decision made quickly and unchallenged. In this respect, such abstract ethical positions do nothing but further entrench an authoritarian, hierarchical power structure at the heart of the profession.

We must not be caught by surprise by what is coming. We need to be
prepared to have these discussions, to recognize, critique, and
challenge the ethical presuppositions we are making. Now is the time, as
we were shown by the protesters in Toronto, to challenge the
unquestioned "truths" of the profession and the power that supports and
benefits from those "truths". If politics is, as I think it is, the
dialectic of ethics and power, then it is time Canadian librarianship
did more than cast off the outdated cloak of "neutrality" and proclaimed
itself a profession of social justice, of community, and the complex,
conflicted messiness of ethics.
