---
layout: post
title: Marxism and Critical Realism, Part One
date: 2019-06-23
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Over the last while I've been investigating anti-positivist
methodologies as a way to approach questions in librarianship. In ["A
'Common Sense' in
Librarianship"](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2019/03/05/common-sense-librarianship.html)
I looked at how hermeneutics - specifically Gadamer's hermeneutics -
might supplant a positivistic commitment to "documentation" in
librarianship. In that post I commented on the strict division between
the scientific and the humanistic approaches identified by Gadamer
(among many others, the idea is quite old), a division rejected by the
strict scientism of positivist LIS (i.e. the idea that the human
sciences can and must have the same procedures and methods as the
natural sciences). For Gadamer,

>the distinction between the natural sciences and the human sciences is that, because the object of the human sciences is humanity and society, we - as researchers - cannot remove ourselves from them, cut ourselves off from our objects of study, as is required by the objectivity of science and the scientific method. We bring our entire lived experience - as individuals living in societies - to the study of humanity and social forms.

In the late 1970s, Roy Bhaskar developed another approach different from
both positivism and hermeneutics. In 1975, he published *A Realist
Theory of Science*, which sought to provide a way to think about science
and the scientific method as actually producing real knowledge,
something Bhaskar thought previous scientific paradigms were unable to
do. In the classical empiricism of Hume and others, a scientific law
required that events occurred in a regular, re-occurring, experimentally
reproducable sequence. These sequences were understood as expressing a
given natural law. However, because these sequences were reproduced in
the closed environments of experiments, and empiricism did not allow for
the possibility of
non-observational knowledge, there was no way to state that previously
witnessed physical regularity had any bearing on subsequent experiments.
For empiricism, only experimental evidence was valid, and so there was
no way to conceive of larger or invisible structures obtaining within
the physical world. Bhaskar adduces the theory of natural selection as
being inconceivable according to pure empiricism: because of the
time-scale of its operation, Darwin had to deduce the operation of the
theory, which went against the purely inductive reasoning allowed by
empiricism.

A subsequent paradigm emerging from the work of Kant, transcendental
idealism, had the opposite problem. For transcendental idealists,
real phenomena were forever unknowable, and the world was constituted by
the intellectual activity of human beings. Whereas classical empiricism
did not recognize creative intellectual activity (e.g. the construction
of theories), transcendental idealism did not recognize the reality of
the physical world. Everything we see and investigate is always-already
ordered by innate ideas. For both classical empiricism and
transcendental idealism the very practice of the scientific method and
the knowledge that arises out of the scientific method, are impossible.

Bhaskar argues in contrast to both, for a position he calls
"transcendental realism". Like transcendental idealism, transcendental
realism relies on what Kant called transcendental questions: "what would
have to be the case for x to be true?" Needless to say, such questions
are impossible in the classical empiricist paradigm. For Bhaskar, the
basic transcendental question for science is something like, "what would
have to be the case for the scientific method to produce real
knowledge?"

I won't go into the details of Bhaskar's theory here, but after
developing transcendental realism as a theory for science, he developed
a similar methodological approach for the social sciences in 1979's *The
Possibility of Naturalism*. There, Bhaskar raises the question with
which I began this post, "to what extent can society be studied in the
same way as nature?". He calls this question "the primal problem of the
philosophy of the social sciences", and argues that naturalism (or
positivism) and hermeneutics represent the two dominant ways of
answering this question ("completely" and "not at all", respectively).

>Positivism, in assuming the mantle of the Enlightenment, associates
>itself with a tradition whose Galilean roots lie in the new Platonism
>of the late Renaissance; while hermeneutics, finding early precursors
>in Herder and Vico and possessing a partially Aristotelian concept of
>explanation, has always flourished in the humus of romantic thought and
>humanist culture. (1).

For the natural sciences and the humanities, then, the solution is
fairly straightforward: positivism is the appropriate methodology for
science, and hermeneutics for the humanities. But where does this leave
the social sciences, caught between the desire for naturalism, hard
evidence, and concrete proposals, and their own history under the broad
umbrella of the humanities? Bhaskar proposes a social-scientific
equivalent to transcendental realism, which he calls critical
naturalism.

Interestingly, Bhaskar notes the existence within the Marxist tradition
of both naturalist and hermeneutic positions, "with the so-called
'dialectical materialists' on one side, and Lukacs, the Frankfurt School
and Sartre on the other" (2). This division maps, I think, onto what
Ernst Bloch has called the "cold and warm streams" of Marxist thought,
and explains, for example, the insistence of Marxist-Leninist and Maoist
thinkers (the latter exemplified by J. Moufawad-Paul) on the
"scientific" nature of Marxism as opposed to the the various
humanist/hermeneutic
Marxisms on offer.

The highest expression within Marxism of the naturalistic or scientific
paradigm is that of Louis Althusser, whose whole philosophical project
was concerned with legitimating Marxism as a science. What Althusser
came up with, under the aegis of the victorious structuralism of the
time, has come to be known as "structural Marxism", a Marxism in which
social structures are everything and individual agency is nothing. The problem of
which takes priority, structure or individual agency, is still a
pressing one in the social sciences today.

Bhaskar reconciles the problem of structure vs. agency by proposing his
own model of society/individual interaction which avoids giving primacy
either entirely to society or entirely to individual action. Like his
theory of natural science, however, Bhaskar argues that critical
naturalism can only produce knowledge if we recognize an ontological
distinction between society and individuals. Individuals are not simply
completely determined by social structures (as in
naturalism/structuralism), nor are they completely free (as in a
strictly humanistic hermeneutics). Rather, society and individuals are
constantly interacting. In this way, critical naturalism conforms to
transcendental realism which argues that there is indeed a real world
that is the object of scientific knowledge (contradicting the Kantians),
but that we do not come to scientific knowledge as blank slates, but
rather bringing all our experience and socially-produced knowledge to
science.

In this, I think Bhaskar's theory conforms to Andreas Malm's view of
historical materialism (i.e. Marxism) in 2018's *The Progress of This
Storm*. There, Malm raises a defense of the Marxist position against
other currents of contemporary social theory (constructionism,
hybridism, new materialism, etc.). For Malm, it is important to
recognize the strict division between nature and society (property
dualism) while recognizing the human beings and the natural world are
made up of the same stuff (substance monism). He equates the substance
monist/property dualism position with Marxism itself: "The tribe of
historical materialists have always preached [that society and nature
are inextricable] - indeed, in its very name is inscribed the insistence
on human beings as made up of matter, while 'historical' implies that
social relations cannot be deduced from it" (58).

Like his theory of the natural sciences, Bhaskar's social theory allows
us to recognize the reality of the social world (structures) while not
reducing human agency to those structures.

At the heart of Bhaskar's critical realism (the name for the combination
of transcendental realism and critical naturalism) is precisely the
distinction between knowledge (which is always socially produced) and
the objects of knowledge, which are real. Malm writes that
distinguishing the object of knowledge from the "means by which it is
known" is "the very starting point of critical realism" (129).

>on the one hand, there is the transitive dimension, or 'the social
>production of knowledge by means of knowledge'... and on the other, the
>things to which they, sometimes tentatively, and always fallibly, reach
>out. For Bhaskar, critical realism is not some high-flown philosophical
>concoction, but a down-to-earth reflection of what scientists actually
>do and think. (129).

Returning to the blog post mentioned above, it is interesting to
consider what insights critical realism (or a critical naturalist
paradigm) might provide within LIS. Ron Day argued that the alternatives
open to LIS were the ones Bhaskar describes: naturalism/documentalism or
hermeneutics. It would be interesting to explore the application of
critical realism to some of the standard research topic within
librarianship.

(This post is part one of an unknown number of posts exploring Bhaskar's
critical realism. While Bhaskar himself has always referred to Marx in
his work, a major attempt to work out the consequences of critical
realism for Marxism has been undertaken by Alex Callinicos. I will
explore Callinicos' views of Bhaskar's work in part two).
