---
layout: post
title: Algorithmic Bias and the 'Fragment on Machines'
date: 2019-03-11
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Two of the major touchstones for discussions of algorithmic
bias in librarianship are Matthew Reidsma's 2016 article ["ALGORITHMIC
BIAS IN LIBRARY DISCOVERY
SYSTEMS"](https://matthew.reidsrow.com/articles/173) and Safiya Noble's
[<em>Algorithm's of
Oppression</em>](https://nyupress.org/books/9781479837243/) from 2018.
Both of these pieces discuss the encoding of particular social values
within ostensibly "neutral" algorithms. Earlier this year, when
[Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez commented on built-in algorithmic
bias](https://www.livescience.com/64621-how-algorithms-can-be-racist.html),
especially in facial-recognition software, she was predictably called
out by engineers, computer scientists, and politicians, who want to
believe - or
claim for political reasons - that algorithms are "mathematically
neutral", pure expressions of disinterested reason. The question I am
interested here is not <em>that</em> algorithmic bias exists, but the
<em>ways</em> the values of particular actors - in this case software
developers, engineers, and the corporations that employ them get encoded
in the software in the first place. And I want to do this by looking at
Marx's theory of technology, and in particular the "fragment on
machines" written in 1858.

In *Capital*, Marx tends to understand machinery as the embodiment
primarily of past material labour. Because industrial machinery is
produced using the same human labour as all other products, it holds the
commodity value of all that prior labour, "paying it forward" into the
value of the commodity it, in turn, is used to produce. Only human
labour can produce *new* value, but the stored-up value of the machinery
is transferred piecemeal to each individual commodity produced by that
machine, which results in depreciation. Machinery has the added effect
of reducing the amount of new labour time required for the production of
commodities, which means that the addition of machinery or the invention
of new machinery is able to replace human labour (i.e. automation), reducing
its share of the production process and therefore its cost. As the cost of human labour goes
down, the capitalist's profit margins go up, at least until the use of
the new machinery becomes generalized, and profits even out once more.
However, because human labour is the only thing that can produce new
value (machinery can only transfer existing value already embodied within it), over time - and mitigated by countervailing tendencies - the general rate of profit in capitalist society tends to fall.

In the "rough draft" of *Capital* that Marx wrote in 1857-58, the
*Grundrisse*, he takes a less objective or scientific view of the
process of capitalist production. Antonio Negri has characterized the
*Grundrisse* as a book about "revolutionary subjectivity", that is, what
it is actually like to live in a capitalist society. One of the most
interesting things in the *Grundrisse* is the constant antagonism
between the dead labour of the means of production and the living labour
of workers. In the "fragment on machines", Marx foresees the end-result
of the process described above. On the one hand, the increasing
replacement of living labour by machinery could mean that capital will
succeed in freeing itself from its requirement on (expensive, troublesome,
antagonistic) labour, resulting in a capitalist utopia where profits are
made automatically, by machine only, in the blink of an eye. This is the
dream of neoliberal financial automation which played such a major role
in the global financial crisis of 2007-9.

On the other hand, however, the reduction of labour time to zero means
that "capitalism" as a system which functions by the extraction of
surplus labour and whose very concepts of value and profit are
constructed according to the difference between necessary and
superfluous labour time, can no longer function. The very idea of
"profit" becomes incoherent as full automation replaces the need for
human labour at all. The adherents of "fully automated luxury communism" believe that at this point capitalism seamlessly transitions to communism, a communism in which all the conveniences of modern life are still in existence. In my opinion, this is a naive view, as the "fragment of machines" doesn't present the two alternatives chronologically (one moving directly into the other), nor as deterministic, in the sense that either situation (or both, in a chronological sense) *must* come to pass. It is better to see in the fragment of machines a descriptive rather than a normative account of contemporary capitalism, where both the crushing alienation of modern technology and its liberatory potential coexist as one of the many unstable contradictions of capitalism.

What is significant in the fragment on machines, and what has provided
the basis for many of the theories of "cognitive capitalism" is that
machinery no longer merely represents the embodied *manual* labour of
the industrial worker, but equally represents stored-up *intellectual*
work. Eventually, this results in a situation in which manual labour
\- measured abstractly only as labour-time - takes a subordinate position
  compared with its dominance in the period of industrial capitalism.
It is reduced to an "indispensable but subordinate moment, compared to
general scientific labour, technological application of natural
sciences, on one side, and to the general productive force arising from
social combination in total production on the other side" (Marx,
*Grundrisse*, 700). This is the moment of decentralized ("crowdsourced")
labour in the age of algorithms. Algorithms, just as much as James
Watt's steam engine, is the embodiment of intellectual labour in a
commoditized form, entering as means of production or "virtual
machinery" into our new production processes. Seen this way, algorithms
are far from mathematically pure natural objects or raw materials, they
are the embodiment of past (intellectual) labour which, unlike abstract
manual labour, has no choice but to encode or embody the ideas,
opinions, values of the workers themselves. Franco Berardi, in *The Soul
at Work*, argues that it is precisely the differences between the
personalities of intellectual workers (developed through education, training, experience, etc)
that makes their labour (for now, anyway)
irreducible to an abstract quantity like labour-time. Intellectual
labour, unlike the atomistic abstract labour described by, say, Adam
Smith, is not interchangeable.

In a famous passage in the fragment on machines, Marx characterizes
these products of human ingenuity as socially embedded forces of
production:

>Nature builds no machines, no locomotives, railways, electric
>telegraphs, self-acting mules, etc. These are products of human
>industry; natural material transformed into organs of the human will
>over nature, or of human participation in nature. They are organs of
>the human brain, created by the human hand; the power of knowledge,
>objectified. The development of fixed capital [i.e. machinery,
>software] indicates to what degree general social knowledge has become
>a direct force of production, and to what degree, hence, the conditions
>of the process of social life itself have come under the control of the
>general intellect and been transformed in accordance with it. To what
>degree the powers of social production have been produced, not only in
>the form of knowledge, but also as immediate organs of social practice,
>of the real life process.

Marx, *Grundrisse*, 706.

It is in this way that the tensions, antagonisms, inequalities, and
contradictions are reified within the means of production. The
transition from a regime of manual labour to one of immaterial
(cognitive, intellectual, affective) labour requires capitalism to seek
to automate such labour as much as possible (according to the logic
developed in the industrial period). The automation of manual labour
runs along a timeline from the steam engine and jenny to the most
advanced industrial robots; the automation of intellectual labour a
timeline from the earliest algorithms to the most advanced AI techniques
(which are, after all, still algorithms). 

I disagree with many of the
theorists of cognitive capitalism that we are currently entering the
phase of the disintegration of the capitalist mode of production. We are
simply moving out of the period of artisanal algorithmic production into
the period of mass production of algorithms (i.e software written by
software, self-modifying software, learning software), which has been
around for decades, but which has only really come into its own since 2011. Capitalism will need to follow its usual path of subsumption
and automation, and the misery of the working class must continue to
increase, and we must go through yet more cycles of economic crisis,
before the final conflict between profit and human life finally comes to
a resolution.

NOTE: the copy of the *Grundrisse* I'm working from is the Allen
Lane/Penguin/New Left Review edition from 1973, translated by Martin
Nicolaus.
