---
layout: post
title: Aftermaths and New Beginnings
date: 2019-10-24
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Last Friday, Greta Thunberg was in town, and local climate activists
organized an afternoon rally. The rally was organized and led by young
Indigenous people, and one of the questions that arose was whether much
of the 10,000 strong crowd was there for Greta's celebrity, or for the
cause. Put another way, would the people who attended the rally return
after Greta left to support and struggle alongside Indigenous people for
land, sovereignty, and the planet. The answer to that question, what
happens next, is one aftermath.

Two nights ago was the Toronto Public Library board meeting, which drew a
[large
number](https://nowtoronto.com/culture/books/pride-trans-rally-toronto-public-library-meghan-murphy/) of Toronto community members, including many trans people,
who spoke, at great cost and risk, against the Meghan Murphy room booking. My friend and colleague Jane Schmidt [spoke as well](https://incidentalacademic.wordpress.com/2019/10/22/my-remarks-to-the-tpl-board/). All this speech was in the end ignored. The board voted unanimously to uphold the City Librarian's decision. The decision was clearly taken well in advance of the various people who told the board their stories of harassment and assault, and for whom - until that point - the library had been a haven. Toronto Public Library, like Vancouver Public and Winnipeg Public, has lost the trust of some of the most vulnerable people in our society. And, as John Fink has asked, for what? What could possibly have been worth the cost. We shall see, in another aftermath.

In *Black Reconstruction in America*, a classic of social justice and of
historical materialism, W.E.B. Du Bois' concern is with the aftermath of
the Civil War and "the part which Black folk played in the attempt to
reconstruct democracy in America". He devotes the first two chapters to
the condition of Black workers (both slaves and free) and poor immigrant
white workers. He argues that, partly through competition, and partly
through the desire to themselves become capitalists and/or slave owners,
white workers could not see that the existence of slavery hurt everyone
more than its abolition. Jobs, like all economic resources under
capitalism, are artificially made scarce, in order to drive down wages
which, as Marx points out, is not remuneration for work done, but the
cost of reproducing the labourer. No such costs are lower than the
enslaved worker, and so racial capitalism set white workers against
the abolition of slavery. The perpetuation of Black dehumanization is as
pernicious as the perpetuation of trans dehumanization. Du Bois notes that had the two rival struggles,
for the emancipation of white labour and for abolition, joined forces,
the combined movement would have been unstoppable. But this would have
required white labour to see that its goal is not to improve the quality
of white working class life, but to transcend wage labour and capital
itself. The support for slavery by white working class leaders in this
period is shameful.

It strikes me that trans-exclusionary radical feminism is in much the
same position as those white labour leaders were: rights under
capitalism are considered a scarce commodity. Like competition for jobs,
competition for rights is seen as a zero sum game. If an immigrant gains
a job, it must be at the expense of a citizen; if a trans woman gains a
right, it must be at the expense of a cis woman. Both are lies told to
reproduce capitalist social and economic relations. Trans exclusionary
feminism cannot see that the solution is not to participate in this
patriarchal-capitalist-devised competition, but to transcend it, to
recognize that the struggle for rights is not a zero sum problem, that
social justice can only be accomplished by a non-rivalrous understanding
of rights. Non-rivalrous rights can be summed up in the difference
between the socialist motto "from each according to their ability, to
each according to their work" and the communist one, "from each
according to their ability, to each according to their need".

A similar zero-sum problem arises in the case of intellectual freedom.
Librarians and "free speech" advocates believe that the job of the state
(e.g. libraries) is to
maintain some kind of consistent ("neutral") balance between competing
values and worldviews. This view of the role of the state arises out of
liberal social contract theory of the 17th century, specifically John
Locke, who saw the state as a moderating force standing above the
competing interests of civil society, allowing space for pluralism and
self-determination to prevail. As a component of liberal political theory,
this view of the state is predicated on individualism and a notion of
individual freedomm that rejects understandings of social determination,
class allegiances, racism, sexism, etc. Such a political philosophy
could only arise in the homogeneous "democracy" of Western Europe in
which they only "individuals" taken into consideration were more or less
the same: white, male, property owners. I go into more detail about this
in my book, but my point here is that this centuries-old political
philosophy designed by and for white, male property-owners is still the
(conscious or unconscious) philosophy of liberalism and librarianship.
From a social justice or leftwing perspective, we can and should reject
both the kind of absolute individualism and the pluralist notion of the
state assumed by the liberal philosophy of librarianship, which includes
the hegemonic concept of absolutist intellectual freedom.

Instead, we have to take social structures seriously, as causal powers
in their own right, that both constrain and enable the exercise of a
freedom considered not as absolute but as in dialectical combination
with what is necessary. I was not free to speak anything other than
English as my mother tongue, because I was born into an English speaking
family in an anglophone country. My ideas do not arise in some
"intellectually free" vacuum, but are the product of social experiences
and social relationships that existed before me and into which I was
born.

We must also reject the idea of the liberal state: the state is not a
force for mediating the conflicts between worldviews to allow pluralism
to flourish. It is, as Marx wrote, nothing but the committee for managing
the affairs of the bourgeoisie as a class. Any purported neutrality, or
mediatedness, or guarantee for pluralism on the part of the state is
merely a figleaf behind which lurks the power of capital to create
artificial scarcity in jobs and rights and to pit worker against worker
and woman against woman. Any neutral, pluralist "guarantee of free
speech" by the state only aligns with and supports bigotry and division.

A consequence of the liberal view of the state is that the state becomes
not something that *contributes* to social justice, not something that
helps create social justice, but merely something that makes it possible
for civil society to create social justice: social justice is up to
other people to do, at some time in the future. "Free speech" advocates
like [Jim
Turk](https://cfe.ryerson.ca/blog/2019/10/social-justice-requires-intellectual-freedom-why-toronto-public-library-should-refuse)
make this claim: that free speech is a necessary condition for social
justice, that it is the job of library to make social justice possible
for supporting free speech. In this view, libraries are not meant to
commit to or work towards social justice, they are just supposed to wait
for someone else to do it. As a librarian, I reject this view, and I
know I am not alone in this.

The only way to do social justice and democracy is to do them, not wait
for someone else to do them. This is as true of trans rights as it is of
fighting climate change or instituting Indigenous sovereignty. All else
is the kind of reformism that plays into the hands of colonialism, capital,
whiteness, and patriarchy.

Individualism and the pluralist conception of the state, arising as they
do out of a homogeneous class of white, male property owners whose
values more or less align, were built on the exclusion of women, people
of colour, queer people, disabled people, and a host of other people who
could a priori be defined as non-citizens (and therefore political
negligible). This leads people like Turk to reduce every objection to
the liberal fiction of intellectual freedom as "offense". At the TPL
board meeting, trans woman after trans woman courageously stood up to
demonstrate that what is at issue is not offense but harm, harm that
could be avoided if we reject the zero-sum view of rights, and the
necessity of capitalism for a hierarchy human worth. This courage, this
demonstration of harm, was roundly rejected by the TPL board and Vickery
Bowles. It was a shameful moment for the profession, if nothing else.

The reduction of real harm to offense shows that, in fact, the defenders
of intellectual freedom and free speech don't take speech seriously.
They don't understand how speech can have power to cause real harm, can
whip up and inflame bigoted passions that have real material effects on
peoples lives. Ironically, "free speech" is a position held by those who
think speech fundamentally unimportant. The same is true of intellectual
freedom: if all ideas matter equally, then no ideas really matter. As
[Shama
Rangwala](https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-the-real-free-speech-crisis-on-albertas-campuses-might-not-be-what/)
has argued with respect to the imposition of the Chicago Rules on
Alberta campuses, 'the university fundamentally regulates what kinds of knowledge are legitimate, and would cease to exist as such without these mechanisms. After all, the motto of the University of Alberta is *Quaecumque vera*: “whatsoever is true,” not “whatsoever meets the legal definitions of allowable speech.”' If intellectual freedom is to mean anything in a profession concerned with texts, language, and ideas, we have to insist on a distinction between legitimate and illegitimate ideas. Where that distinction falls is a political problem we must not shy away from, for example, by ignoring criticisim and lecturing the critics of absolutist intellectual freedom.

Returning to the theme of aftermaths, the profession - and society at
large - must decide what it is going to do. There are protests planned
for the TPL event, and Toronto Pride is planning a counter-rally. The
professional library associations are aligning one way or another, and
those that are aligning with TPL and liberalism are being challenged by
their members. As a profession, as Allison Trumble noted [on
Twitter](https://twitter.com/atrumbled/status/1187180193397362689), we
have to figure out our relationships to our communities, to our
associations, our institutions, and with each other. For academic
librarians, this issue is coming in the form of campus "free speech"
regulations and the necessary limits of academic freedom. We have to
figure out how to ensure that public library workers who disagree with
the positions of their leadership are able to speak freely without
repercussion. It is not the least painful irony about the defenders of
free speech in public libraries that such freedom is denied their own
employees. There are many
aftermaths, and they just keep on coming.

But I think this may also be time for a new beginning, a refoundation of
the profession in Canada. Many of us are questioning the value of
professional associations that mirror the hierarchies of our capitalist
organizations and the state, are questioning the ability of associations
to represent members, even the possibility of representation itself.
While the eruption had been building for some time, I think the TPL
event has exposed a serious rift within the profession, one that breaks
down along lines of generation, class, and ideology, and probably along
many other faultlines. To echo Chernyshevsky and Lenin's famous question
on how to make a revolution, now that this split has been
exposed, what is to be done?
