---
layout: post
title: Spinoza, Hobbes, and the State
date: 2019-04-29
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

*Spinoza, Modernity, and Intellectual Freedom, part two.*

In my [previous blog post](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2019/04/26/spinoza-modernity-intellectual-freedom.html), I (following Negri) included Spinoza in an anti-modern genealogy which included Machiavelli and Marx. Rory Litwin  [considered](https://twitter.com/rorylitwin/status/1121839329863589888) my reading of Spinoza odd, especially since Spinoza (who I contrasted with Locke) "believed liberal democracy would be the best form of government". Rory's points are well taken, and I think my perspective on them deserves to be clarified here.

In the first place, I consider Spinoza's "freedom" to be, paradoxically
perhaps, deterministic. We are free to conform to God/nature's place for
us in nature itself. This is the freedom of someone thrown overboard in
the middle of the ocean. They are indeed free to do whatever they
choose, but there are only a limited number of actions (swimming, for
example), they can take in order to survive. In the *Ethics*, Spinoza often uses the expression
"power to act", which sounds like freedom to decide or choose but, to
use another analogy, I see this as the kind of power needed to lift a
barbell. The more power you have, the higher you can lift the weight,
but you are still weightlifting - you have increased your power to act,
but the range of activities available is again limited.

Having said that, I admit that in the last couple of blog posts I have
leaned very heavily (perhaps too heavily) on the idea of structure and
determination, in order to contrast it with what I see as a concept of
absolute freedom that comes out of liberal philosophy, and which stands
as an unquestioned assumption in many current debates within
librarianship, especially debates around intellectual freedom. Lenin
referred to this kind of exaggeration as "bending the stick", so I
should probably clarify that "absolute determination" is just as
unrealistic as "absolute freedom"; the relationship between structure
and agency is more complex and complicated.

When it comes to the state, it is true that Spinoza argues that, because
human beings are not free from passions, do not act according to reason and
virtue, they come in conflict with each other, and therefore a state is
necessary to keep the peace and ensure the rights of individuals:

>In order, therefore, that men may be able to live harmoniously and be
>of assistance to one another, it is necessary for them to give up their
>natural right and to make oe aother confident they will do nothin which
>could harm others. [...] [S]ociety can be maintained, provided it
>appropriates to itself the right everyone has of avenging himself, and
>of judging concering good and evil. (Ethics, p. 136).

This is very close Hobbes' definition of the state, the sovereign power
which takes upon itself the right to judge, condemn, and execute. But
there is a very significant difference between Hobbes' state and
Spinoza's.

Both Hobbes and Spinoza agree that reason and human nature require that
individual human beings seek for their own advantage, and do everything
they can to further their own interests and preserve their own
wellbeing. (Spinoza is not immune from the liberal individualism of the
time). However, for Hobbes this advantage leads to the "war of all
against all" that requires the institution of the state in order to
forcibly create a condition of peace in which individual self-interest can be
pursued without concern for attack by fellow human beings. For Hobbes,
the state of war follows directly from human being's pursuit of
self-interest.

For Spinoza, on the other hand, the pursuit of self-interest in
accordance with reason and virtue *does not* lead to a state of
war. It is human beings' inability to live according to these principles
("virtue") which requires the institution of a state. For Hobbes,
sovereign power is indeed the best form of government. For Spinoza, on
the other hand, the state is the best form of government *unless we can
live according to reason and virtue*. It is the second best form of
government; the best form of government is one denied by the theorists
of liberal democracy (like Locke and Hobbes). Spinoza is explicit about
this. The thing that most helps each individual in the pursuit of their
self-interest is *other people*.

>If, for example, two individuals of entirely the same nature are joined
>to one another, they compose an individual twice as powerful as each
>one. To man, then, there is nothing more useful than man. Man, I say,
>can wish for nothing more helpful to the preservation of his being than
>that all should so agree in all things that the minds and bodies of all
>would compose, as it were, one mind and one body; that all should
>strive together, as far as they can, to preserve their being; and that
>all, together, should seek for themselves the common advantage of all.
>(Ethics, p. 126).

Now, it could be argued that this comes closer to a Lockean conception
of liberal democracy, except that in Locke, individualism remains
sovereign, whereas in Spinoza, individualism is in a direct relationship
with the common advantage. Indeed, this passage can be better summed up
by the description in the *Communist Manifesto* of a communist society
organized so that "the free development of each is the condition of the
free development of all". How one feels about the possibility of
achieving this kind of communal life is not an empirical one, it is
taken in advance, and is determined by one's view of the emotional,
moral, and political capacities of human beings (in their own time,
Locke, Hobbes, and Spinoza would have said that it depends on one's view
of human nature).

It is in this - communal if not *communist* - sense that Negri writes about Spinoza's radical democracy,
the radical democracy of the multitude in which "common advantage" is
worked towards without individual identities being lost (as in the
caricature of communist society). For Negri,

>The passage to society is not represented by any concession of right as it is in seventeenth-century absolutist thought; rather it is presented in a leap forward that integrates being, from solitude to multitude, to sociability that, in itself and for itself puts an end to fear. (Negri, The Savage Anomaly, 204)

In this view, the multitude “does not tend to become a totality”, that is, a class, nation, people, or mass, but remains “a set of singularities, an open multiplicity” (Negri, *Insurgencies*, 14). It is this openness that places the constituent power (*potentia*) in conflict with the constituted power (*potestas*) of the state, and which generates the possibility of political action. The multitude constantly produces, creates, and thereby develops new social relationships, new ethical and social norms and rights. These in turn create a social power “through the logic of immediate, collective, and associative relations” which becomes an “ethics of collective passions, of the imagination and desire of the multitude” (Negri, *Insurgencies*, xv). It is this self-created constituent power which funs afoul of the constituted power of politics, religion, etc. In Spinoza’s radical conception of democracy, “power does not exist… except to the extent that it is a constituent power, completely and freely constituted by the power of the multitude” (Negri *Insurgencies*, xvi).

When Spinoza writes, against what we would now call a libertarian
perspective, that

>A man who is guided by reason is more free in a state, where he lives
>according to a common decision, than in solitude, where he obeys only
>himself. (Spinoza, Ethics, p. 154).

he also undercuts the atomic, autonomous individualism of liberalism.
The pure abstract individual liberty that underpins "intellectual
freedom" does not - cannot - understand the idea of a "common decision";
the only poles of decision-making are the state and the individual, an
oversimplified, reductionist binary.

Indeed, in class society, "common decision" is impossible; all decisions
arise from the interplay of a limited individualism and the structures
of class, nation, etc. In other words, all decisions are *political* and
do not arise from what Spinoza calls reason. Human beings cannot be
"guided by reason" so long as scarcity, want, competition remain the
priorities of a world whose ruling-class profits on the isolation of all
people from each other, profits from the prevention of the formation of
the multitude Spinoza described, and from the radical - non-liberal -
democracy constituted by its self-activity. Indeed, from this
perspective "intellectual freedom" is a meaningless bromide which serves
to obscure the structures of power and control that always-already
determine our intellectual interests, curiosities, capacities, and
desires. Only in the kind of society envisaged by Spinoza and Negri (and
Marx) would "intellectual freedom" mean anything at all, but as Rory
pointed out, Spinoza's "freedom" may be different from what we might
expect.

*References*.

Antonio Negri, *Insurgencies Constituent Power and the Modern State*,
1999, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Antonio Negri, *The Savage Anomaly: The Power of Spinoza's Metaphysics
and Politics*, 2000, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Benedict de Spinoza, *Ethics*, 1996, London: Penguin Books.
