---
layout: post
title: On Innocence
date: 2019-02-07
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

>Having heard the Beethoven, we hear Ives differently, and having heard
>the Ives, we hear Beethoven differently. We carry the discourse around
>in our heads. We can no more ignore it - can no more listen
>'innocently' - than we can follow the ancient recipe for turning lead
>into gold... But why should we ever want to ignore the discourse? The
>force and richness of our response to music (and not only music)
>depends on it. That is what is meant by participating in a culture.

Richard Taruskin, *On Russian Music*, p. 341.

Last week, at Safiya Noble's talk at the Ontario Library Association
Superconference, an audience member asked how we balanced the need to
regulate and moderate things like search engines with the risk of
authoritarianism. How do we prevent becoming, like, say, China. The
implication in "slippery slope" questions like this is that we begin
from a position of unrestricted freedom which (in some way)
self-regulates and which any attempt to consciously interfere with must
then lead to corruption and authoritarianism. Safiya Noble responded by
saying that this very idea of an unrestricted, self-regulating online
space was a myth, and that we have to begin there - with the knowledge
that our online spaces are already constructed with particular goals and
ends in mind - and not from some myth of "the internet in the state of
nature". The simple dichotomy between "free search" and "Chinese
authoritarianism" is a false one.

The next day, at my own talk, which called for critical skepticism of
any reliance on abstract concepts like freedom and democracy, as well as
for a partisan, committed librarianship, I got the same question. If I
call for a departure from "neutrality", from the self-regulating
unregulated (intellectual) freedom which - it is presumed - holds sway
within the profession, then how do I suggest we avoid the slippery slope
towards authoritarianism in librarianship. Having heard Safiya Noble's
answer, I gave basically the same one: there is no such thing as a state
of nature populated by self-sufficient rugged individualists. There is
no such thing as pure unconstrained freedom, intellectual or otherwise; we are all members of a culture,
brought up by parents and teachers with their own values, perspectives,
biases, and prejudices. There is no transcendental point outside the
culture from which we can judge and decide whether or not to intervene.
The very fact that we do not choose to learn a language is a good
indication of the "already existing" culture that "limits" our
individual freedom.

Everything we do - whether we consider it "neutral" or not - is a
committed intervention in our culture. I'm calling for making that
commitment explicit, just as Safiya Noble calls for the regulation of
search and other online spaces to be made explicit (and public) rather
than being left to private interests.

What is significant here is not only that the slippery slope question is
itself "innocent" - it comes from a naive belief in autonomy,
individualism, self-reliance, etc, all the bromides which a hegemonic
liberalism instils in us from the time we are born, through parents who
believe in these things, schools which teach them, the "common sense" of
bourgeois society, and a marketing industry that capitalizes on the
the consequences of believing in them. But the slippery slope question is also innocent
in another way: it presumes the innocence of society. *Our* society - a
society of freedom, individualism, and the social contract - is
innocent, unregulated, living off manna from heaven. Other societies -
and the current bogeyman is China - are coercive, authoritarian, deny
individualism and freedom itself.

In a draft manuscript written in 1857, Marx challenges this idea, which
was a mainstay not only of bourgeois economists like Adam Smith, but
even of critics like the anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon. Marx argued
that we are never - can never be - outside society, outside a system of
social and cultural relationships which pre-exist us and into which we
are born and grow up. Like the liberal economists, liberal political
theory of the 17th century - specifically Locke, Hobbes, and Rousseau -
inaugurated the idea of an original "state of nature", in which
self-sufficient individuals go about their business and exercise their
property rights. Marx dismissed these ideas as "Robinsonades", fictions
like Dafoe's *Robinson Crusoe* of 1719. (For how these ideas play out in
questions of sovereignty and the state, I recommend J. Moufawad-Paul's
recent blog post on  [Lenin's conception of the
state](http://moufawad-paul.blogspot.com/2019/01/thoughts-on-lenins-conception-of-state.html).)

The problem with such Robinsonades - still with us in the form of the
presumptions behind the slippery slope questions - is that it prevents
us from explicitly and publically taking control of our own society.
Free societies (like free search and intellectual freedom) are, by
definition, unrestricted, and any regulation or attempt to control them
must lead to Chinese-style tyranny. But the truth is that such freedom
does not exist - that is what it means to participate in a culture. By
arguing from such an innocent position we do not guarantee some
purported freedom of the public sphere, or the internet, or
librarianship; rather we *abandon the field* to the private interests
who *already* control and manipulate those spaces for their own profit,
avarice, and lust for power.

This innocence is a core component of many issues within librarianship,
from intellectual freedom (which relies on a veneer of sophistication
and wordliness but is still based on a fiction of innocence), to the
reaction of white librarians at ALA Midwinter: librarianship cannot be
structurallly racist, sexist, or ableist, because we are a profession
of unrestricted freedom; any misbehaviour must stem from individuals
attempting to corrupt the state of nature (this is, for example, part of
the argument around social media policies). This is the fiction of
innocence that allows the far-right to co-opt library trustworthiness to
give themselves a coating of intellectual credibility, and it is the
fiction of innocence that allows racism, sexism, ableism, and all the
other structures of oppression to thrive in our profession and our
professional organizations.

If we want to fix these things, we must in some sense come to terms not
necessarily with guilt, but with responsibility, commitment, the fact
that, while we do indeed develop in a particular society and culture, we
are not completely determined by it. We can - and must - make choices,
but those choices have to made from a place other than a fatal
innocence.
