---
layout: post
title: The Exhaustion of Critique
date: 2020-10-04
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

As part of my PhD research into the philosophical assumptions in LIS,
especially around intellectual freedom, I've come to realize that what I
initially thought was a left-wing insight - that liberalism is the
hegemonic ideology of capitalism - is in fact not denied by many
mainstream political theorists. In her 2019 book *In the Shadow of
Justice*, on the origins and reception of John Rawls' *Theory of
Justice* (1971), Katrina Forrester writes that 

>in his wake, political
philosophy was remade. Philosophical liberalism became synonymous with
Rawls, and political philosophy synonymous with a kind of liberalism
born of postwar America.

In September, Donald Trump leveled an attack on Critical Race Theory
that made me think of earlier attacks on Marxism (not just in the
McCarthyite 1950s, but in the post-Soviet 1990s when I started
university). The privileged position of Rawlsian liberalism means that
any non-liberal political philosophy - Marxisms, feminisms, Critical
Race Theory - are automatically excluded from mainstream discourse. It
is in this sense that "critical theory" has been expanded from its
original, Frankfurt School definition, to cover pretty much any
theoretical position that does not derive from liberalism or subscribe
to a Rawlsian framework. 

Perhaps most importantly in the current
conjuncture, critical theory tends to describe philosophical positions
that take social structures (of power, of oppression) as real and
efficacious just as much (and sometimes more than) individual agency.
The inability to recognize or admit structural racism, structural
sexism, or structural concentrations of power is a cornerstone of
the liberal political perspective. Sadly, this inability was on display
again this week with Quebec premier Fran&ccedil;ois Legault's
unwillingness to recognize structural racism as a causal factor in the
death of Joyce Echaquan.

The inability to understand or recognize structures is not a mistake or
a failure of knowledge to be corrected through education. It is baked
into the individualized, atomistic worldview of capitalism that produces
liberal political thought itself. In *Reclaiming Reality*, Roy Bhaskar
connects scientific (and social scientific) points of view with the
working of the capitalist mode of production. For example, he equates
the "wage form" of value, which mistakes money exchanged for *labour power* with money exchange for *labour* and the "fact form" of scientific knowledge which mistakes the constant conjunction of events for the workings of physical structures not reducible to them. Bhaskar writes that

>In the ideology of empiricism the world is regarded as flat, uniform,
>unstructured and undifferentiated: it consists essentially of atomistic
>events or states of affairs which are constantly conjoined... Such
>events and their constant conjunctions are known by asocial, atomistic
>individuals who passively sense (or apprehend) these given facts and
>register their constant conjunctions. Underpinning and necessary for
>the reified facts and fetishized systems of empiricism are thus
>dehumanized beings in desocialized relationships.

It follows that a social ontology of individuals, of their choices,
and their personal ethics occupies the central concern of liberal
political thought. This is why, for example, liberal politicians insist
that police brutality is a matter of "a few bad apples" - fault is
individualized and destructured.  Contrary to this view, the structures
of racism, sexism, and social class which are invisible except through
their effects, are easily explained away by liberalism as nothing but
the (surprisingly! inexplicably!) constant conjunctures of individual choices.

In terms of critical librarianship, this way of understanding the
difference between hegemonic and critical theory demonstrates that we
are right to focus on structures. In the context of his own (structural)
philosophy of critical realism, Bhaskar writes that "emancipation
depends on the transformation of structures, not the amelioration of
states of affairs". (This has grave implications for political strategies
of harm-reduction, but that is too much to get into here.) This plays
into a problem I have previously discussed about a [lack of theoretical
self-awareness in
LIS](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2020/04/04/theory-and-commitment.html)

But taking up a critical position against a hegemonic philosophy is
exhausting. The author of one political science textbook has described
liberalism as "the air that we breathe", and its monopoly on education,
advertising, and political discourse ensures that its presumptions and
prejudices are taken for granted, made natural, common-sense, and
intuitive (i.e. ideological). For the Marxist, the feminist, or the
Critical Race Theorist, simply to climb onto the playing field of debate
and discussion means overcoming a whole slate of "common sense" terms,
definitions, and ways of understanding the world. This is why, for
example, we constantly have to fight against the non-structural
definition of racism we are all taught in school, in order to finally
get past the questions of definitions and actually argue substantively with one another.

But having to argue these points and definitions, when liberals can
simply take their own view for granted, is demoralizing and exhausting.
This, too, is not accidental. Toni Morrison, in a speech at Portland
State University in 1975, made exactly this point when she said that


>It's important, therefore, to know who the real enemy is, and to know
the function, the very serious function of racism, which is distraction.
*It keeps you from doing your work*. It keeps you explaining, over and
over again, your reason for being.

The point of the attack on Critical Race Theory, like earlier attacks on Marxisms and
feminisms, is to make it *that much harder* to constantly explain our
starting points, terms, definitions. We can see this in the
cross-purposes around trans rights and intellectual freedom, we can see
it in the problems with our professional organizations (e.g. structural
racism in ALA), we can see it in
the difficulties we have making EDI anything but rhetorical in our
institutions. But our non-liberal perspectives are not arbitrary: they
are - as Michael Oakeshott described conservatism - dispositions borne
out of our relationships to each other and to the world. A Critical Race
Theorist cannot suddenly switch to liberalism (though liberals have no
qualms about eclectic cherry-picking or raiding  of non-liberal philosophies). Perhaps
in this sense, then, critical theories are not philosophies, but
embodied, situated worldviews, and so the idea that Rawlsian liberalism
is synonymous with political philosophy is not far off the mark. But
that's all the more reason for it to be challenged and faught.
