---
layout: post
title: Consultation and the Politics of Recognition
date: 2020-04-19
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

As my PhD research on Intellectual Freedom in Canadian libraries
evolves, it is moving away from ethical and political-economic questions
towards what should more properly be described as political theory. One
thing I am trying to do is to situate the IF transphobia incidents at
VPL and TPL within larger social and political issues in Canada,
especially as they relate to the question of minority rights. Minority
rights, in the classical-liberal, absolutist IF perspective, are that
free speech/free expression protects, against the tyranny of the
majority. This is straight out of John Stuart Mill. But as I have
written before, Mill's theory, like Locke's, was developed in a
relatively homogeneous society of white, property-owning men (with white
women and all people of colour by definition excluded from political and
philosophical consideration).

Over time, imperialism/colonialism and globalization changed the face of
the societies in which these theories arose. In imperial centres like
the UK, immigration from the colonies exposed the racism at home early
on: think of Enoch Powell's "Rivers of Blood" speech in 1968, and more
recently - drunk on Brexit - the British government's attempts to 
deport members of the "Windrush generation" who had come from the
colonies to the UK between 1948 and 1970. In settler-colonial states
like Canada, similar processes have taken place with respect to demands
for Indigenous sovereignty. What were formally seen - at least in their
own self-image - as relatively homogeneous states (and formal policies
of assimilation were meant to maintain some sense of homogeneity) have
now had to face up to the fact that they are not just multicultural but
multiethnic and (more importantly, in Canada's case), *multinational*
polities in their own right. Additionally, globalization has (or had -
things are changing rapidly) bound sovereign nation-states into
international or global organizations like NAFTA, the EU, the World
Bank, or the United Nations. The important role played by the WHO in the
current pandemic and its defunding by Donald Trump (while the US was
already millions of dollars behind in its WHO funding commitments) is an
indication of the current tensions between national sovereignty and
international order.

All this to say that the classical liberal philosophy of Locke and Mill
has not been adequate to imperial or settler-colonial states for a long
time, and yet it is most often with reference to Mill (or others of the
same ilk, like Jefferson and Madison) that IF absolutists deal with
questions of minority rights. One has only to glance into any edition of
the ALA's *Intellectual Freedom Handbook* to see this in action.

To deal with the changing complexion both domestically and
internationally of the question of minority rights, cultural diversity,
and multinational politics, various political theorists and philosophers
in the 1990s developed the theory of a politics of recognition. Axel
Honneth, James Tully, Nancy Fraser, and perhaps most influentially,
Charles Taylor, all addressed the politics of recognition from various
minority rights angles. The theory began as a way to understand and
recuperate the project of multiculturalism, but it rapidly gained prominence not only in
feminist theory (for example in Fraser's work, though she is also
critical of the concept), but in queer and trans rights work as well.
Basically, the politics of recognition draws on Hegel (and sometimes on
Frantz Fanon) to argue that since self-consciousness (and some would say
individuality itself) comes about through mutual recognition with an
Other *who is an equal*, misrecognition or nonrecognition can have a harmful effect on
people's self-image, leading to various psychological and social
problems. These problems, the theory goes, could be mitigated by a
properly egalitarian politics of recognition. Accordingly, various
"recognitions" took place within settler-colonial states, recognition of
land rights and cultural practices (towards Indigenous people),
recognition of a distinct society (for Quebec), recognition of gender
equality (for women) and, in 2016 with Bill C-16, recognition of gender
and sexual identity as protected grounds in the Canadian Human Rights
Act.

I would argue that the values statements of public libraries attempt to
participate in this politics of recogition, through values of community
engagement, but also through much of the discourse around safe spaces,
respect for all identities, and allyship. What critics of libraries -
especially in the transphobia, room-rental debates - point out is that
these values and commitments are discarded when they challenge
Intellectual Freedom - IF becomes the only value that matters.
Recognition, then, only goes so far, remains limited to only particular
spheres (cultural or identity spheres) rather than actually making
libraries change their policies.

In many ways, this problem lies at the heart of one of the most
convincing critiques of the politics of recognition, Glen Sean
Coulthard's *Red Skin White Masks* (2014). Coulthard argues that because
the politics of recognition is predicated on *equality*, it allows
recognition to be limited to spheres of cultural practice (where we can
all be considered equal) but not to fundamentally *unequal*
relationships (colonizer/colonized, for example, or labour/capital)
(Coulthard draws on Fraser's distinction between "affirmative" rather than "transformative" redistribution, that
is, a surface adjustment of minority/majority relationships, rather than
a fundamental transformation). The liberal regime of (formally) equal
rights and an exploitative political economy remains untouched.  As a result, recognition becomes
"cultural recognition" only, and the project of multiculturalism is
saved without having to deal with the underlying capitalist social and
economic system.

The height of hypocrisy when it comes to recognition is "consultation".
As we have seen with respect to UNDRIP, and most recently with pipeline
approvals, Indigenous consultation has become a key part of the federal
government's process. But consultation merely involves *recognition* of
Indigenous views, it does not go so far is to listen to them, take them
seriously, or act on them. Coulthard's argument is that the presumption
of equality in a politics of recognition is completely fictitious in a
society based on colonial oppression
and exploitation: the Hegelian theory of
recogntion does not hold in a situation of such vastly unequal power
relationships. The power of the Canadian state means that it can deign
to offer "recognition" without having to actually change.

We saw the same thing play out at the scandalous Toronto Public Library
board meeting in late 2019, when many trans people stood up to tell
their stories to the board. They were, in the sense we have been
discussing, *recognized* by the board, and much of the discourse coming
from board members has been around *recognition* of the rights, needs,
and harms facing trans communities. But the aftermath of the board
meeting - and the documents received under FOIA show that this outcome
was determined in advance - have shown that, as
with settler-Indigenous relationships, the politics of recognition only
went as far as the board wanted and no further, that is, only as far as possible to
demonstrate recognition/consultation, without actually having to
change library policy.

The politics of recognition is not the only way to understand these
dynamics, but it does offer a particularly clear-cut way to understand
the VPL and TPL reactions to criticism of their IF position in the last
couple of years. 

More to come...
