---
layout: post
title: Retweets, Endorsements, and Intellectual Freedom
date: 2020-10-16
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Last night (October 15), Donald Trump took part in a town-hall style Q&A
rather than participate in a virtual or online presidential debate. At
one point, moderator Savannah Guthrie [questioned Trump](https://www.cbsnews.com/news/trump-town-hall-savannah-guthrie/) on his retweet of
a conspiracy theory that "[Joe] Biden orchestrated to have Seal Team 6 killed to cover up the fake death of Osama Bin Laden". The exchange went as follows:

>"Why would you send a lie like that to your followers?" Guthrie asked
him.

>"I know nothing about it," Mr Trump said.

>"You retweeted it," Guthrie pointed out.

>"That was a retweet, that was an opinion of somebody, and that was a
retweet. I'll put it out there, people can decide for themselves, I
don't take a position," the president responded.

>"I don't get that," Guthrie countered. "You're the president - you're
not like someone's crazy uncle who can just retweet whatever!"

Now, this exchange has many connections to debates around
intellectual freedom in librarianship. In the first place, there's the
implication that presenting an opinion and allowing people to decide for themselves is a cornerstone of a free democracy. The 1939 Library Bill of Rights frames - in an early version of what today we call "both-sidesism" - as "all sides of question on which differences of opinion exist should be represented fairly and adequately" in library collections. An "opinion" (i.e. a retweet) is not amenable to a logic of truth or falsehood, but merely to fair and adequate representation. The villain in Umberto Eco's *Name of the Rose* puts it like this: "the library is testimony to truth as well as to error". But erasing the difference between error and deliberate falsehood raises questions we will return to below.

In the second place, the exchange quoted above raises the question of
power. Guthrie's distinction between "someone's uncle" and "the
president" as an acknowledgement that social position and power enters
into the terms of the debate. This acknowledgement goes against some of
the core tenets of liberal political thought, for example the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms, which states in section 15.1:

>Every individual is equal before and under the law and has the right to
>the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without
>discrimination and, in particular, without discrimination based on
>race, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, sex, age or mental
>or physical disability.

For liberalism, this section supports an unquestionable and
unchallengeable equality of rights and liberties, universally applied
laws, etc. It *appears* as fundamental to our sense of justice. However,
as critics of "post-racial" or "colour-blind" political discourse have
demonstrated, by denying that things like race, sex, or disability have
any bearing on rights and liberties, the Charter of Rights in fact
*denies* that structural inequalities on those bases exist. "Equality is
enshrined on our Charter of Rights" becomes a way to deny the reality of
structural oppression and inequality in the lived reality of Canadian
society. (More recently, we can see the distinction at work in the way
the RCMP responded to the Wetʼsuwetʼen and Tyendinaga land-defense blockades earlier this year, and the way they have allowed anti-Indigenous intimidation to proceed unimpeded at the Mi'kmaw lobster fishery).

This formal equality as the foundation of justice was made explicit in John
Rawls  *Theory of Justice* (1971) which revitalized liberal political
philosophy, including the philosophy which informed the Canadian Charter
of Rights. In the *Theory*, Rawls argues that social justice can only be
achieved if people *exclude any social or identity characteristics* when
they decide on principles of justice. Rawls argues that if people don't
know their social position, their class, race, etc, then they will
decide on principles of justice that are fair to all. In this way,
real inequality and injustice are evacuated from Rawls' theory. In
addition, any collective act or action is automatically undermined,
because all possibility of coming together over shared experience is
immediately suppressed. (This of course echoes the doomed, impossible
imperative of capitalism to isolate workers even while work itself
requires the increasing interaction of more and more workers).

 Now, it
may be argued that Rawls is attempting an abstract, generalized,
universal philosophy, describing what *ought* to be the case rather than
what *is* the case. However, Rawls' philosophy became the foundation for
real policy decisions - for example the framing of the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms in 1982. As Katrina Forrester has written in her
recent book about the origins and reception of Rawls' theory, "in his
wake, political philosophy was remade. Philosophical liberalism became
synonymous with with Rawls, and political philosophy synonymous with a
kind of liberalism born in postwar America". 

But Rawls' "original position" also by definition excludes differences
in power. Rawls' theory - and by extension all liberalism - is unable to
comprehend the differences between an opinion disseminated by "someone's
uncle" and one disseminated by the "leader of the free world".
Similarly, libraries are unable to comprehend the difference between a
transmisic speaker presenting her views on her own website or in her own
podcast. "Retweets are not endorsements" is fine for "someone's uncle",
but it is unappropriate to apply to platforming or dissemination
undertaken by the president or by state institutions like libraries. 

The third point I want to raise about Trump's exchange is the idea that
"people can decide for themselves" - another cornerstone of absolutist
intellectual freedom. This idea, too, comes to liberal political thought
through Rawls, but it is most succinctly expressed by Kant in his 1784
essay, "What is Enlightenment?" Enlightenment, Kant claims, is "man's
[sic] emergence from his self-incurred immaturity. Immaturity is the
inability to use one's own understanding without the guidance of
another". Charles Taylor expresses this idea in post-Rawlsian terms in
his critique of Robert Nozick's libertarianism: "realizing a [good life]
involves developing the capacity to act and choose in a genuinely
independent way". For Taylor, "the free individual or autonomous moral
agent can only achieve and maintain his [sic] identity in a certain type
of culture", and so political goals are those which tend to support the
free, individual, and autonomous ability to act and choose in an
independent way.

But the assumption that there *is* such a thing as a genuinely
independent act or an autonomous actor is a huge one. What
liberals going back to Kant ignore is that we are born and brought up in
already existing social, cultural, and political relationships and
structures (including racist and sexist ones). We are born into a
household and community that speaks a particular language, that is the
language that has primacy in our ways of thinking and communicating, our
local libraries tend to default to that language in their collections,
communications, programs, and services, we read easiest in that
language, which means we are closest to writers in that language, and
writers from cultures where that language predominates, etc, etc.
Thought of in these terms, Kant's contention that there is any way in
which understanding may be used "without the guidance of another" falls
apart. This undercuts the entire Kantian framework of intellectual
freedom, by challenging the very idea of freedom for liberalism itself.

Ironically, it is the adherence to a Kantian notion of Enlightenment and
intellectual maturity (rather than the liberal bugbear of postmodernism)
that makes it impossible to take sides and call out falsehoods. To take
a side, to commit to a position, to argue a point, to insist on a
distinction between truth and falsehood is to try to overcome someone
else's intellectual independence (we can see this in the issue of
reading-level or genre indicators for IF-absolutists). Respecting the
intellectual freedom of individuals means that everything becomes an
opinion (even an error, to be self-corrected by the intellectually
mature individual) rather than a truth imposed by the objective outside
world. Liberalism perhaps more than postmodern relativism (with its
distrust of "grand narratives") has
contributed to the erosion of any idea of objective truth or fact in
political discourse.

Notice, too, how political thinking involves processes and procedures.
The truth content is unimportant; what is vital for liberal democracy is
the procedure of respecting an individual's autonomy. I have written
[elsewhere](https://reallifemag.com/lawful-neutral/) on the question of
liberal proceduralism and its political effects.

Once we start looking at the genealogy of intellectual freedom and
digging into its epistemological and ontological assumptions, it becomes
easy to challenge the easy platitudes of, for example, the ALA's Office
of Intellectual Freedom. But more than that it makes it impossible to
ignore the fact that liberal philosophy - including the philosophy of
intellectual freedom - serves a very real political purpose: to erase
structures of inequality and oppression, to place them outside of
political discourse itself, to make them literally *undescribable* in
its terms; but also to obscure the workings of power - both the power of
the state and its institutions, but also our own capacity for collective
power - and to make everything the responsibility of "free, autonomous
individuals".

Last week, Justin Trudeau encouraged Canadians to donate to food banks
when they do their shopping. Swift criticism followed, that Trudeau more
than anyone had the power to pass laws making food banks unnecessary and
eliminating food poverty. But the ideology of liberalism makes this
impossible for him and his party - indeed, the entire Canadian political
class - to comprehend: Kant's theory of enlightenment and Rawls' theory
of justice require that individuals make their own choices, decide on
their own actions, and it is not the place of the state - or state
institutions like libraries - to interfere with individuals' use of
their own self-guided reason. To do so would be to hamper individuals'
achievement of enlightenment itself.
