---
layout: post
title: Photography, Time, and the Dialectic 
date: 2020-08-07
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

About a year and a half ago I began to get seriously into photography. I
have always had (indeed, had to have) an artistic occupation that was
separate from work, but which felt like more than a craft or a hobby.
For a long time, I wrote poetry - I still do, though I feel less and
less in touch with that side of things as time goes on. When I moved to
Alberta I began seriously playing the mandolin, and was pretty obsessed
with it for a number of years, but that dropped off too a few years ago.
I still write and play occasionally, but poetry and music aren't as central to my
aesthetic life as they once were.

Photography poses its own challenges. By temperament I'm a formalist and
I enjoy abstraction - perhaps this is why my poetry was never concrete
enough for others, and why I appreciate purely instrumental music, with
its absence of a referent. Photography, as the recording of some really
existing thing, posed the problem of aesthetic abstraction, but that, I
think, is purely a technical problem. Abstraction in photography can be
approached similarly to the way figurative, pre-modern painters
approached it, in the patterns and juxtapositions of light, shadow,
texture, etc. For example, in the photo below, the image is still
representational, but the abstract elements have been brought out in the
high contrast between light and shadow, the enigmatic absence of the
face.

<img src="/assets/images/EdyozSbUYAImF1I.jpg" />

A more challenging problem is proposed by the lack of the time
dimension, the lack of duration. In poetry and in music, the artifact
*develops* over time, grows and spreads and turns back on itself. The
idea of *rhythm* in both poetry and music is a value of time which the
photograph - as an instantaneous slice of reality - lacks. Sometimes the
word "rhythm" is applied to the elements in a photograph, but I think
this is a metaphor that is only partly applicable. The lack of the time
elements is one of those "productive constraints" that all arts need,
and photography - like all successful arts - makes a virtue of that
necessity. Nevertheless the problem of development and resolution
remains. 

I see it as a problem because it seems to limit the capacity of
photography to change the world. Perhaps this would be less of a problem
if, over the course of photography's history, we hadn't placed such a
weight of world-changing responsibility upon it. Photojournalism,
documentary and conflict photography, Robert Frank's *Americans* and the
work of the Farm Security Administration, all *seem* to change the world
by forcing us to see the world differently. But is this in fact possible
without the movement of time? It seems, on the surface, as if
photography must be the quintessential bourgeois art-form, slicing and
isolating moments of time as if they were self-sufficient, atomistic,
rather than elements of a longer and deeper flow of changing social
reality. Photography, in this sense, seems bound by ideology in ways
that other art forms perhaps are not. And the moving picture is no
solution, since it has always been so comfortable with its commodity
nature and the consumerism of its production and consumption.

In her 1977 book of essays *On Photograph*, Susan Sontag makes the
following remark:

>Marx reproached philosophy for only trying to understand the world
>rather than trying to change it. Photographers, operating with the
>terms of the Surrealist sensibility, suggest the vanity of even trying
>to understand the world and instead propose that we collect it.

If we follow Hegel, as Marx did, we have to recognize that the dimension
of time is essential to true understanding. The process of dialectical
tension, contradiction, and resolution is a temporal process, and
without it, Sontag suggests, understanding is impossible. All that is
left is a process of registration and classification, a process of
cataloguing (parallels with librarianship crop up throughout Sontag's
critique of photography). But if we go further than understanding, to
change, then we would have to, like Marx, set Hegel on his feet. Now we
appear to be at a further remove from any potential for photography to
at least assist in the transformation of the world.

It would be tempting to think of photographs as yet more arguments
tossed into the ideological void, arguments marshalled against the
bad-faith actors identified by Sartre whose role is not to reflect and
understand, to see the world differently, but simply (like Dinesh
D'Souza in his timewasting and distracting insistence on confirming
Trump's mispronunciation of "Thailand") to keep the talk going, to
exhaust, to wear down ethical positions through the weight of sheer,
repetitious dishonesty. But we know that they have, in the past, borne a
stronger evidential weight. Nick Ut's photo of Phan Thị Kim Phúc, or
Kevin Carter's "Struggling Girl" are at the very least ethical testimony
that change the world they are dropped into. They bear ethical
consequences not only for the photographers (Kevin Carter committed
suicide a year after taking the photo, and Don McCullin has always been
very open about the questionable ethics of conflict photography and the
toll it takes).

I think the element that Sontag misses is that time may appear to be
stopped by a photograph, time may be a dimension absent from a
photographed image, but time continues to flow in the world outside the
photograph itself. The production and dissemination of an image is a
temporal project. And more than that, photography, like all art, is
unalienated labour, that is, it's *work*. And all true work is part of a
temporal metabolism with the material world, a back and forth, an ebb
and flow of transformation and self-transformation. The dialectic may be
absent from the frame, but the frame is part of the ongoing dialectic of
our relations with each other and with the world around us.

Sontag speaks a lot about the alienating effect of photography, its
voyeuristic and violating nature, its pretense at objectivity. And all
of what she says about that is true: as a modern, technological art,
photography takes part in the isolating and alienating nature of all
capitalist technology. But like all art it is *also and at the same
time* a social relationship and a piece of work. This contradiction
cannot be resolved through thought or a change of perspective, it can
only be resolved through a transformation of the social, economic, and
political world itself. In the end, then, perhaps photography performs a
vital service precisely in registering the contradictions, in fixing
them in time, in totally preventing their resolution through narrative
or discourse or functional harmony. (Here we have to remember the very
bourgeois conception of harmonious resolution itself, and the ways in
which Western classical music and the novel reinforced the bourgeois
social order through their very forms and structures). Paradoxically perhaps, the fixed
nature of the still image brings home to us the necessity and
inevitability of temporal change; we see the nature of time most clearly
when it is withdrawn, as it is in the photograph. 

The photos of the Farm Security Administration show us a lost world, and
it would be easy enough, as Sontag says, simply to "collect" such
images. But if we pay attention to the way past time has been frozen,
has been made unnaturally, eerily static, then the truth and necessity
of historical transformation is made even clearer. A photograph, by
capturing, fixing, and stopping time, reinforces the vitality of change,
brings out the flux and ephemerality of being, and exposes political
projects that imagine that time can be stopped (liberalism) or turned
back (conservatism) as fools errands. Perhaps this is a productive
connection between Marxism and photography which Sontag, from her
vantage point as a child of the Welfare State was unable to see. She
thought that photography was "too suffused with irony to be compatible
with the twentieth century's most seductive form of moralism". Both
irony and Marxism, however, have changed in the twenty-first century, as
has philosophy. Perhaps all three have changed
enough for photography to play the role Marx's eleventh thesis
on Feuerbach reserved for philosophy itself. But at any rate, it is
enough for now that it scratches a particular aesthetic itch, satisfies
a certain demand for unalienated work, that its larger importance can be
set aside for a while to see how things, as they always do, turn out.
