---
layout: post
title: Intellectual Freedom as Origin
date: 2020-11-15
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

One thing I've figured out in my research on intellectual freedom is
that two competing notions are hidden beneath what is presented as a
clearly defined legal and moral concept. Intellectual freedom can be
understood as both an *origin* - something which naturally pertains to
individuals, must be protected and remain unchallengeable - and an
*outcome* - intellectual freedom as something to be attained. Both these
forms of intellectual freedom have long philosophical lineages, but the
clearest expressions can be found in social contract theory and Kant's
"What is Enlightenment?"

For Kant, "enlightenment" is the outcome of a process of self-education,
in which one eventually discards the "self-incurred tutelage" of
authority to think for oneself. Intellectual freedom, then, is something
to be achieved, and outcome to work towards. If libraries were to focus
on this form of intellectual freedom, then they would prioritize
education, up-to-date information, fighting misinformation, etc. And we
know that libraries do, in part, do this. *In part* this is what we mean
by supporting intellectual freedom.

But the other form of intellectual freedom, which comes out of social
contract theory, sees intellectual freedom as something the individual
possesses *originally*. Like all other natural rights and freedoms in
the so-called state of nature, the individual of social contract theory
is *a priori* intellectually free. To support and maintain intellectual
freedom in *this* sense is to resist censorship, remain "neutral",
ensure the equal distribution of free speech/free expression, etc. And
we see that libraries try to support intellectual freedom in *this*
sense as well.

There are problems with intellectual freedom as outcome to do with
power, ideology, and the impossibility of a simple correspondence of
ideas to the material world. But for now I want to tease out some of the
consequences of intellectual freedom as origin.

Intellectual freedom as origin means that *whatever ideas one happens to
have* must be the result of that originary freedom. We rarely go so far
as to say that these ideas were deliberately chosen in a form of
rational choice, but they *are* (in whatever sense) rational. Who are we
to argue with the ideas that a rational, free individual has chosen to
subscribe to. The role of libraries in supporting intellectual freedom
is to ensure that nothing impinges on the free choice of *whatever* idea
anyone happens to have. This has grave consequences for information
literacy. Carrie Wade has exhaustively challenged the orthodoxy in this
area
([here](https://seadoubleyew.com/150/i-am-not-your-fake-news-savior/),
[here](https://seadoubleyew.com/284/information-is-political/),
[here](https://seadoubleyew.com/355/capal2019/), and
[here](https://seadoubleyew.com/576/no-answers-only-questions-the-false-fight-against-fake-news/),
for example) - definitely read her work on this!

I want to connect this idea of intellectual freedom as origin with two
connected movements that have special significance in the pandemic:
anti-vaxxers and anti-maskers. Under the terms of intellectual freedom
as origin (social contract, state of nature, absolute individualism,
etc). Not only does society have no right to challenge the ideas an
anti-vaxxer or an anti-masker might hold, society has no right to even
*try*. The "natural right" to uphold and protect an originary
intellectual freedom means that we have to *presume* that any individual
has freely chosen the ideas they have and the positions they hold, no
matter how dangerous or unsupported they are. 

At one stroke, education becomes an impossibility, given that education
is there precisely to change the ideas that an individual holds (which
is why homeschooling, at least in my province, is connected to
libertarianism, which is itself connected with anti-vaxx and anti-mask
positions).

But this originary IF does not just have theoretical forebears (as a
materialist, I definitely wouldn't want to suggest that). There are
solid social, political, and economic reasons to stand by an idea of IF
as origin. Think of "the customer is always right"; think of the myth of
the radically individualist thinker, standing alone, and *misunderstood*
by everyone else (and the social alienation that underwrites this
position); think of the spread of conspiracy theories like
flat-eartherism and QAnon, both of which rely on an intellectual freedom
position that says *any idea you happen to hold is true simply by virtue
of the fact that you hold it*. The oppressive structures of capitalism
rely on these ideas being taken at face value, taken for granted, common
sense.

How does education fit here? I think education relies on the ambiguity
between IF as origin and as outcome, because education is a core element
in the outcome tendency. But it is anathema to the origin tendency, and
there's the rub: if libraries are not just "give them what they want"
institutions, if we are indeed institutions of education, "useful
knowledge", then we would have to be able to distinguish in practice
between outcome and origin. But this would require taking a
non-absolutist stance on IF (because absolutism would have to include IF
as origin, as it does now).

Similarly, for libraries to be "arsenals of a democratic culture", there
has to be a way for ideas to change. Use of a library to produce the
kind of well-educated public that ensures democratic health and
longevity only works if your theory of IF can encompass intellectual
change. IF as origin can't, because it prejudges every idea - no matter
how perverse - as the product of a free, individual, rational choice.

All of the positions that arise out of IF as origin - think of "the
customer is always right" in the context of anti-mask customers - have
become more acute under COVID, as has just about everything else. This
is a good opportunity to rethink the assumptions of intellectual freedom
and the consequences such assumptions force upon us; the crowning irony
of a profession supposedly committed to intellectual freedom.

This contradiction at the heart of intellectual freedom - obscured by
the reification of the social relations of intellectual activity and
"freedom" itself - require resolution. Whatever we end up with, and this
resolution would likely have another name than "intellectual freedom",
has to take both the genealogy of its concepts and its obligations
seriously. As always, however, this will in turn require a
transformation of the social relations that produced the social
contract, Kantian enlightenment, and library values themselves.
