---
layout: post
title: "Contracts, Social and Otherwise"
date: 2020-03-18
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Periodically, the accumulation of capital reaches a point where such a
vast amount has already been accumulated that every addition of surplus
value or profit makes only a minuscule difference to the total. Such
economic limits combine with social and political ones to produce
crises, like the Depression or the Second World War, which are useful to
capitalism *in part precisely because they wipe out a certain amount of
capital value*, allowing capital accumulation to restart at a higher
level of technological, social, and political organization. After the
Second World War, capital and labour came to a kind of of unspoken
compromise, whereby capital would give up a certain amount of the profit
it saw as its rightful due in exchange for social peace on the labour
front and the creation of society able, for the most part, to afford the
consumer goods being produced by industry (the car here is the classic
example). This post-war consensus saw capital paying workers more,
allowing for more consumption, but also for higher taxes; higher taxes,
of course, allowed for the creation of the safety-net institutions of
the welfare state.

This period, which still looms large in the ideological imagination of
the developed liberal-democracies, only lasted thirty years before
capital - under pressure from worker and student revolts on the one hand
and oil prices on the other - decided to renege on the post-war
agreement, recapture the portion of profit it was losing to labour and
social programs, and
dismantle the welfare state, mainly through privatization, tax cuts, and
austerity. This transition, which began in the early 1970s, was to the
form of social and economic orthodoxy we know of as neoliberalism. More
and more it appears as though neoliberalism itself only lasted until the
Global Financial Crisis of 2007-2009. What we are living through is the
transition period to a new inflection of capitalism, a new mode of
accumulation, similar to the transition to the consumerist welfare state
after 1945, or the neoliberal period in the 1970s. Leaving aside the
possibility of a socialist or communist revolution right now, the main
question to my mind is whether this transition is to a new period of
welfare state social protections, or to the final apotheosis of class
struggle and the collapse of capitalism. The answer to this question -
which will have to be an empirical rather than a theoretical one - will
likely determine whether or not a revolution is actually on the table,
as it did in the 1930s and 1940s.

Now, one of the strongests concepts of the welfare state was that of the
social contract (developed in the 18th century by Rousseau), and this
idea dies hard. Indeed, I think it forms the current basis of various calls for
rent and eviction freezes, nationalization of industry and health care,
and universal basic income. One aspect of the social contract that was
still prevalent when I joined the workforce in the 1990s was the idea of
loyalty to one's employer. Anyone who thought seriously about the social
contract understood that this loyalty had to work both ways, and the
insistence on loyalty to one's employer in the 1990s became more
strident as neoliberal organizations increasingly reneged on welfare-state loyalty to their employees throughout the 1990s and into the new millennium. 

The rise of zero-hour contracts and other forms of "gig work" precarity, which were in turn modeled on the almost totally virtualized
financial economy, proved to be the indicator that whatever social
contract might have existed between employer and worker had been
completely destroyed. Nevertheless labour law, which exists to protect
the power of capital against labour, bound labour tightly to capital
while requiring zero reciprocal commitment of capital to labour. The
only way in which capital could be bound to labour, the only way to
force capital to take responsibility for its commitment to labour,  was through workers'
struggle (e.g. strikes) and collective bargaining.

Twelve years into the transition, we can see how even existing
collective bargaining power weighs very little against the power of
capital. Libraries are being kept open and staff forced to continue to
work with the public despite the danger inherent in
the global pandemic and in some cases despite states of emergency being
declared. Library workers are being summarily laid off - sometimes
through reduction of hours on zero-hour contracts, sometimes even with a
collective agreement in place. Budget cuts and layoffs are imminent in
many libraries, only held at bay right now because of the crisis, but
bound to return in full force when the crisis is over. Governments are
stepping in to try to protect workers, renters, and those at risk, but
governments are also forcing through austerity budgets designed to wreck
the last vestiges of social welfare. In both cases, these are governments born in the neoliberal period, whose understanding
of the real contract of the welfare state is almost nil, and whose
tendency is to cut taxes, reduce government footprint, privatize, and
hope that the invisible hand will protect people. (Spoiler: it will
not).

This isn't good enough. If this crisis does not lead to socialism, and
I'm afraid I don't think it will, it *must* lead to a refounding of the
social contract along welfare state lines. The unlimited power of
capital, the inhuman alienation produced by advanced capital
accumulation, the complete instrumentalization and isolation of life,
has to be reversed through taking political control back and forcing
capital - as we did during the Depression and the Second World War, as
we did in the late 1960s - to curb its tendencies towards total
destruction of the social and ecological fabric of our lives. Capital
will never do this willingly; it will have to be forced. Now is the time
to force it. However, this is not merely a question of changing our
mind, of thinking differently, it is a question of a fundamental
restructuring of the economic relations of our society in the service of
a new contract. The contract will be temporary, capital will never be
able to control itself or its greed for more profit, but it will at
least buy us some time to organize again for when that day comes.

Some will think this is reformism, that we ought to be letting the
crisis develop so as to sharpen the thirst of the multitude for the
revolution. But that kind of accelerationism does no one any good in the
long run. What kind of society can we build if we force the economic
generators of isolation and alienation, of poverty and dehumanization, to their bitter conclusion.

Needless to say, such a fundamental restructuring will have to reexamine
the question of nations in a global context, and this will mean taking
seriously Indigenous sovereignty and what that means for the social
contract of capital not only with human beings but with the planet
itself. Again, capital will not do this willingly, it will have to be
forced to accede to the demands of humanity.

Neoliberals will argue that you can't force someone to be party to a
contract: that contracts are founded, as Friedman insisted, on free
participation and engagement - indeed, the neoliberal conception of
freedom is based precisely on the model of free contract. And yet, the
formally free workers under capitalism have been forced to sign
contracts for their labour ever since they were driven from the land
into the cities and factories. Coercion has never been an obstacle to
signing a contract, except in the ideologies and fever dreams of
capital.

In addition to Indigenous sovereignty, the "repressive tolerance" of a
refounded 21st century social contract will have to apply to those who
would dehumanize a section of the population, for dehumanization is the
hallmark of instrumentalization, and instrumentalization is the motive
force of capitalist social relations. Our conceptions of "free speech"
like our conception of "free contract" will have to undergo a massive
refoundation on principles other than the primacy of profit and
capitalist accumulation. Public servants will no longer get to parade
their opinions in white nationalist, phrenological, transphobic rags. 

Neoliberalism is over, the crisis is upon us, governments have to
respond, and we will have to hold them to account. Elections are not the
way to hold them to account: worker resistance is. In a world where
public libraries can layoff staff without notice in the midst of a
global pandemic, we owe our employers nothing. We produce everything,
including production itself;
let's produce everything for ourselves and for each other rather than for
the profit of a few who don't care a fig about us anyway, despite all
the protestations and statements of principles coming from "our leadership".
