---
layout: post
title: National Emergency Library - Dialectic and Contradiction
date: 2020-06-16
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

>When, as happened recently in France, an attempt is made to coerce
>women out of the burka rather than creating a situation in which a
>woman can choose what she wishes to do, it's not about liberating her
>but about unclothing her. It becomes an act of humiliation and cultural
>imperialism. Coercing a woman out of her burka is as bad as coercing
>her into one. It's not about the burka. It's about the coercion.

Arundhati Roy, *Capitalism: A Ghost Story*.

One of the things I think is really striking about this quote is how
illustrative it is of dialectical thinking. When faced with a phenomenon
(coercing women into burkas), the initial temptation is to reach for the
opposite (coercing women out of burkas), but this opposite is just as
bad as the initial phenomenon, and so a "negative" space is opened up
for a further move, to transcend both these opposites into a new
situation, which at least moves us forward onto new terrain, rather than
simply reinscribing the prior terms of the debate simply by changing the
signs, moving to the opposite pole.

Very often, the problems with the initial position are framed as being
ones of knowledge: if we simply *knew more* or *thought differently*
then the problem would be overcome. This is the problem of idealism,
where "problems" are seen purely as one of knowledge. In the racist
colonialist case, this failure of knowledge is often attributed to
religious mysticism, lack of education, or (in the worst cases) racial
inability to understand. Sometimes a (white) saviour can get people to
think and understand better/differently (through example or education),
though sometimes the racist structures are so strong that even this is
written off as impossible, and the colonized subjects dismissed as
ignorant beasts. Again, following Roy, the issue is not intelligence
or knowledge, but the material power of racist social structures.

However, there is another, more "scientific" version of this idealism,
which posits that the problems with the initial position are due to a
lack of empirical data, that a solution to the contradiction is
available if only we can discover more "evidence". Georg Lukacs, in his
*History and Class Consciousness* describes this in general terms:

>The methodology of the natural sciences... rejects the idea of
>contradiction and antagonism in its subject matter. If, despite the
>contradictions that do spring up between particular theories, this only
>proves that our knowledge is as yet imperfect. Contradictions between
>theories show that these theories have reached their natural limits;
>they must therefore be transformed and subsumed under even wider
>theories in which the contradictions finally disappear. [...] But we
>maintain that in the case of social reality these contradictions are
>not a sign of the imperfect understanding of society; on the contrary,
>they belong to the nature of reality itself and to the nature of
>capitalism.

Contradictions, such as those between coercing women into burkas and
coercing women out of burkas, cannot be resolved by "better knowledge",
but by changing the world which requires the coercion of women in the
first place.

===

The other day I was tagged into a discussion on the publisher's lawsuit
against the Internet Archive's National Emergency Library initiative. It
took me a while to clarify my thinking, and in the end I decided it was
too much to try to fit into the constraints of a Twitter debate. There
are many problems with Internet Archive, and there are many problems in
publishing, but the debate around the NEL tends to boil down to a single
main contradiction. On the one hand, there is the ability of writers to
support themselves through fair (or at least adequate) compensation; on
the other hand, there is the view that in an emergency, there should be
no barrier to access to information. (This "information wants to be
free" perspective is informed by IA's capitalist libertarianism, but it
doesn't have to be; there are other reasons to support the position).
Given these two antagonistic positions, the debate often comes down to
how to balance the livelihood of authors and the information needs of a
society. Authors feel they are being coerced into losing a revenue
stream through piracy, while "society" (unfortunately in this case
taking
the form of private Carnegie-esque "philanthropy") feels resources are
being held for ransom. The debates around balance suggest that, as in
Lukacs' description, if we just "figure it out", if we have better
arguments, more imagination, or more empirical data, then we can get this
right. Lawsuits themselves are often seen - especially in Supreme Court
cases - as the way for this information and knowledge to be attained in
order to make the "right" decision. (Interestingly enough, this process
is itself meant to be dialectical, through the adversarial nature of
court proceedings).

However, the contradiction between author livelihood and the needs of
society is not simply resolvable through better thinking. Rather, this
antagonism "belongs to the nature of reality itself and the nature of
capitalism". Resources necessary to the social good are held to ransom
because *commodities only realize their value through sale*. Author's
livelihood's are put at risk *because they must sell their labour in
order to survive*. Both the books in the NEL and the author's
labour-power are commodities under capitalism (whether we think they
should be or not), and so under capitalism we are forced to think in
terms of commodity exchange and prices. There is no resolution to this
problem within the terms of capitalist economics. Authors are workers
just like all other workers: capital will reduce their compensation to
the lowest possible level, no matter what. Making society/Internet
Archive appear as the enemy mystifies the exploitative relationship
between author and publisher. There is nothing sacred about being an
author that protects it from the vagaries of the market and the
inexorable logic of commodity exchange.

Furthermore, the individualism foundational to capitalism forces authors
into seeing themselves as independent beings in an antagonistic
relationship with a separate thing called "society", rather than both
individuals and society only being coherent concepts with respect to
each other. In his remarks about intellectuals in the prison notebooks,
Gramsci writes that "the whole of idealist philosophy can easily be
connected with this position assumed by the social complex of
intellectuals and can be defined as the expression of that social utopia
by which intellectuals think of themselves as 'independent', autonomous,
endowed with a character of their own, etc." (As an aside, I should
point out that this underpins the hegemonic understanding of
intellectual and academic freedom as well).

By the same token, IA's machinations around Controlled Digital Lending
and the NEL simply serve to reinscribe commodity logic under the guise
of philanthropic libertarianism, making legal reform or social change
the field of action of powerful private individuals, rather than of
social movements working in collectivity and solidarity. Neither "author
rights" nor "free information" destroys the social relations of private
capital and labour under capitalism. And the IA doesn't even have the
benefit of the outright rejection of commodity models claimed by
Alexandra Elbakyan (though even here the power to make change becomes
closely identified with an individual with too much arbitrary power, and even
SciHub is implicated in the politics of security and access to a large
extent).

We see these issues crop up in all kinds of areas - for example in the
current controversies around race-shifting - precisely because racial,
heteropatriarchal capitalism is riddled with contradictions. We spend a
lot of time and energy trying to find "the right solution" when in fact
there can't be a solution within the network of social relations that
constitute the capitalist mode of production. Capitalism will have to
end for any real solution to some (not all!) of these problems to be
uncovered. Until then, we might as well avoid the trap of trying to
think ourselves into a solution (idealism), which can only lead to
half-measures and reformism, and focus instead on material ways to
challenge the social relations themselves. Defunding/abolishing the
police is a good thing, but creating autonomous zones and mutual aid
groups that do not respect the social hierarchies of capital and labour
are even better. But they are not the "right answer", they are only the first steps on the road to a real
solution, a real transformation of society.
