---
layout: post
title: On Misunderstanding
date: 2020-11-01
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

One of the questions asked about the Marxist theory of ideology is
this: if social relations determine our thoughts, ideas, values,
opinions, etc; how do we account for the fact that new ideas arrive,
some people do think differently, etc. One of the more orthodox Marxist
answers to this is that differential social relations (i.e. being a
capitalist vs. being a worker, being Black vs being white, or being a
man vs. being a woman) produces different ways of interpreting the
world, etc. However, the problem remains: among workers, for example,
how do we explain different ideas, etc, etc. Intersectionality is one
way of explaining this, but at a certain level it leads to finer and
finer determinations that risk devolving into individualism again,
which undermines the whole concept of ideology and social construction
to begin with. 

Another way to think about this is through *misunderstanding*. I've been
reading Wittgenstein's *Philosophical Investigations* recently, and one
of the key insights of that work is that misunderstanding is always
possible. Because language is determined by how it is used in particular
contexts (language-games), and these language-games are conventional
(i.e. not connected in any material or concrete way with any other
phenomena; a Marxist would say they are dependent on non-linguistic
social relations), anyone without experience of those conventions can
always misunderstand what is "meant" by a given word, sentence,
proposition, or expression.

This helps to explain the differential of ideology: the language-game
conventional to men is different from the language-game conventional to
women. Challenging traditional gender-roles or critiquing toxic
masculinity is to challenge those conventions of masculine or feminine
upbringing: the language-games of being a man or being a woman. Toxic
masculinity is the particular language-game in which (some) men are
raised which is internalized and forms the limits of men's world.

But these internalized language-games, which we can think of as
structural, in the sense of structural racism or sexism, can and are
considered *correct* prior to the act of critique. This is how they
are "traditional". From the perspective of the internalized
language-game, then, critique is not just a challenge, it is
*incorrect*, it is a *misunderstanding*. (We can see this in the
response of conservatives to things like Black Lives Matter or Trans
Rights Are Human Rights: at its most ingrained, racism and transmisia
are so internalized, so deep and "natural" that any alternative is seen
as *wrong*). But this wrongness, this misunderstanding is precisely what
produces new ideas, new ways of seeing and experiencing the world.
Misunderstanding opens new horizons of change.

But this also makes it supremely difficult to express those new ideas.
When I criticize liberalism from the perspective of a certain kind of
postmodern Marxism, I am always open to the challenge that I have simply
misunderstood liberalism. My perspective becomes not just wrong, but
dismissable, ignorable. (This is one reason why Critical Librarianship
is so often ignored in mainstream LIS discourse). My critique of
Intellectual Freedom is a misunderstanding of Intellectual Freedom; my
critique of Democracy a misunderstanding of democracy; my use of Spinoza
or Wittgenstein a mistaken or incorrect use. In this way,
ideology and traditional structures of power and oppression erect
barriers of self-defense. But according to Wittgenstein, usage can never
be correct or incorrect, understood or misunderstood, just different.

I'm not misunderstanding liberalism: I am looking at it
within the context of a different language-game. Critical Race Theorists
look at race and power from a different language-game than liberalism
too; as does radical feminism; as does trans activism. The difference is
that *these* language games - all dismissed as *misunderstanding* the
so-called *real world* (note the appeal to a non-linguistic, external
arbiter) - are not dominant, not traditional, not deeply ingrained
within white-supremacist, heteropatriarchal capitalism. *These*
language-games are the challengers, but this challenge comes with its
own extra work. Because we are, in a sense, taking the field against an
established language-game, we have all the extra work to do in defining
and expressing the contours of our language-game, where the other's is
taken for granted, natural, common-sense, correct, and true. It is this
extra work that contributes to the [exhaustion of
critique](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2020/10/04/exhaustion-of-critique.html).

And of course, we rely on extra-linguistic factors to help shore up our
case, our argument that we do not misunderstand: PhDs, academic
appointments, a track record of publishing, performing professionalism,
performing whiteness, playing all kinds of games, help to be taken
seriously within the dominant language game. This carries its own risks,
of course; we might come to see ourselves as mistaken, or we might find
our own language-game swamped by the dominant one, co-opted, defanged,
or extinguished.

The recent policies in the US and the UK against Critical Race Theory
are attempts to enshrine it as "mistaken" or a "misunderstanding" within
law and political power. The BBC directive against participating in
Pride is another way to dismiss LGBTQ+ activism (especially trans
activism) as misguided or mistaken. The paternalistic reaction of the
Toronto Public Library board to the testimony of trans people in October
2019 was a rejection of their lived experience as "self-misunderstood"
(the contradiction-in-terms indicates the incoherence of the response).

I don't really have anything to end with. We have to keep struggling,
fighting, arguing, etc. I suppose I just wanted to try to point out one
way in which patriarchal and racial capitalism erects its defenses
against all challengers. Perhaps one thing we can do is to *own* our
misunderstanding. To paraphrase a cliche, if social justice is wrong, I
don't want to be right.
