---
layout: post
title: Boycott, Strike, and Factory
date: 2020-09-13
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Is it possible for academics to strike?

The expansion of factory logic and factory relations outside of the
factory itself, the process Marx called the subsumption of labour under
capital, brought labour that had previously been outside the
exploitation/production dynamic (i.e. contributing to the production of
surplus value) fully into the fold. Autonomist feminists like Federici
and Fortunati have described the ways in which housework and other forms
of women's labour were "unproductive" in the sense of unpaid while at
the same time contributing to the reproduction of the labour-force, the
cheapening of the costs of labour, and the increase in surplus-value
production.

The neoliberalization of the universities is the process of subsumption
applied to academia. Previously insulated (as professionals) from the
labour-capital relationship (exploitation, surplus-value), over the past
thirty years, academia has gradually been brought fully into these
relationships. Only once academia had been proletarianized was an
academic strike really possible. But structures like academic freedom
and tenure help to maintain the illusion that *part of* the academic
workforce is non-proletarianized, constituting a labour aristocracy that
faces both proletarian university workers and the working classes of
society at large.

When the players in the NBA and other leagues went on strike to protest
racist police brutality, the owners and the media were careful not to
call it a strike but a boycott. On the other hand, the "#ScholarsStrike"
which developed in support of the players *called* itself a strike, but it is by no
means clear that it in fact constituted a strike. To call a strike a
boycott is ideological self-defense; to call teach-ins and public
lectures a strike is co-opting the radicality of a strike in the name of
the status-quo.

The first indication that the Scholar's Strike - at least in Canada -
was going to be turned to the advantage of the universities was when
it was folded into a university's strong and solid commitment to Equity,
Diversity, and Inclusion. My university president put out a statement
confirming this commitment and encouraging (deigning to allow?) any
academic or student who wanted to participate in the Scholar's Strike to
do so. It is a strange kind of strike that has the blessing of the
employer.

In the event, academics with tenure and academic freedom who
participated in teach-ins and lectures did not, in any sense, withdraw
their labour. At best, they used their autonomy to do something else
that day (some universities made sure that classes and previous
commitments were rescheduled to accomodate the "strike"). By all
accounts these were valuable and well-attended, but they were academic
work, and they relied - like all academic work - on the labour of others
(support staff, programmers, admin assistants, etc, etc). One academic
referred to participation in the Scholar's Strike as "professional
development and service work that contributes to the mission of the
university". If it was either of those two things, it does not fit the
definition of a strike.

Last year, unionized academics in the UK went on a number of strikes
that were absolutely intended to (and succeeding in) impede the
business of the university to the extent of winning at least some
acquiescence to the demands of workers. Workers weren't paid (because it
was a strike) and had to rely on union strike funds. In Canada, some
academics have been asked to take vacation time, which raises the
question of whether anyone can be considered to be on strike if they are
still being paid by their employer?

While the teach-ins and lectures were, as I say, valuable and
well-attended, it is important not to co-opt the language of a strike
for something that isn't a strike. Not only does it allow the
universities to claim EDI credit for something that absolutely did them
no harm, but it weakens the strike claims for other workers. In other
words, calling something that isn't a strike a strike is the
flipside of calling a strike a boycott.

Baharak Yousefi put it concisely when she tweeted, "If strike, then
withhold pay & no public statement of support from the employer for the
striking employees. If not strike, then no withholding of pay (or
"vacation") & public statement of support for employees who choose to
take part in the action. Don't get to mix and match."

The issue here really is that both the university and the academics
benefit from calling the Scholar's Strike a strike. The university
because it can appear to be supporting a radical social movement for
Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion, and thus be on the right side of history;
and academics because they get to play at radical labour action without
actually risking what striking workers risk. This coincidence
of interests is, really, the definition of a labour aristocracy.

ADDENDUM: In this post I have deliberately adopted an
anti-intersectionalist stance in a way I think is similar to what
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak has called "strategic essentialism".
Analytically, if we want to challenge the structure of labour
aristocracy, we have to simplify the identity-relationships in play, in
order to enable academics to recognize themselves as workers. I am
 completely aware of gender, racial, class, and other differences
at work within academia, and that more risk and more work accrue to the
most marginalized positions. But presenting academia in an essentialist
way can help to uncover the class and labour relationships and the ways
in which an academic labour aristocracy benefits from the differential
exploitation of the most marginalized.
