---
layout: post
title: Change of Plans
date: 2020-01-30
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Since October of 2018 I've been pursuing a distance PhD in political
science from the University of Birmingham. My research project was on
Italian Theory (e.g. autonomist Marxism), AI, and jobs in Canada. While
I was engaged with the political theory part, it was hard to really dig
into the empirical work because, fundamentally, I don't have a handle on
the details of AI and jobs - that's not part of my educational or
professional background. I was trying to dig into it, but it was a slog
and wasn't coming particularly easily.

Looking back at the blog posts I've written on Intellectual Freedom, I
discover that the [first one I wrote] was in August of 2019, at the
beginning of the TPL events, in response to [Alvin Schrader's post](https://cfe.ryerson.ca/blog/2019/08/can-public-libraries-maintain-their-commitment-intellectual-freedom-face-outrage-over) on the
Ryerson Centre for Free Expression blog. I remember writing that blog
post waiting for the 2019 installment of the local Politics of Library
(on Labour)
conference to get started. One of the problems with being a distance
student working on a research project in an unfamiliar area is the lack
of a cohort, of contacts, of colleagues and friends operating in the
same area. The Politics of Libraries organizing committee and attendees
are one example of a cohort like that, and so are all the people I know
in the profession in Canada working at the intersection of #critlib,
labour, politics, and social justice.

Since last August I've been more and more involved in the struggle to
change the conception of intellectual freedom that sits at the top of
the (mutually exclusive) pyramid of library values. I haven't been alone
in this of course - Jane Schmidt has spearheaded the [#timeToTalkAboutIF
campaign](https://incidentalacademic.wordpress.com/2020/01/13/timetotalkaboutif-campaign/),
and it's become clear to me over the last six months or so that here is
an area where I can contribute and in which I am intellectually engaged
and committed. After talking it over with my advisor, I've decided to
change the focus of my research project to work instead on a critique of
hegemonic intellectual freedom and the ways in which constituent power
might offer an alternative perspective more adequate to the current
socio-political context (e.g. the resurgence of the right, populism,
misinformation, etc). 

I was a little worried about this, as it feels like the last 18 months
or so of work on AI and labour might have been wasted, but I recognize
that as the sunk-cost fallacy it is. It's better to work on something I
think is important and which I can really sink my teeth into. This blog
may, as a result, focus less on technology issues than it has in the
past, and more on issues surrounding intellectual freedom, social
responsibility, and equity/diversity/inclusion initiatives (and their
critiques). 

Anyway, I just wanted to mark this place in the life of the blog.
