---
layout: post
title: On Reconsideration 
date: 2020-02-27
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

The philosophical lineage of intellectual freedom in libraries relies
mainly on either J.S. Mill's *On Liberty*, Habermas' *Theory of
Communicative Action*, or a combination of the two. Often, Mill's
influence goes unacknowledged, because Mill's liberalism and the
reasoning used to justify it, is hegemonic in Western bourgeois
society. We breathe it in at home, at school, at work; it is an unmarked
presence in government policy and press releases. It is *ideological* in
the Marxist sense - a set of ideas more or less consciously held by
which people make sense of the society around them. Precisely because of
the "normality" or common-sense of classical liberalism, Habermas'
variant on liberalism is often conceived as bringing more conscious
thought, more "critical theory" to the project of supporting and
maintaining absolutist intellectual freedom.

In both the Mill and Habermas versions, intellectual freedom is
important because all arguments, views, values, and opinions *must* be
open to challenge and reconsideration. Indeed, this is the only way "the
truth" can be approached - through the challenge and reconsideration of
previously held ideas. There are three main problems with this
perspective. 

First, it assumes that ideas are not determined by a
person's background, experience, position in society, relative position
in dynamics and structures of power, etc. Ideas are pure and immediate,
and are adopted and changed by the conscious choice of the person who
holds them. Many other non-liberal theories argue that this is not the
case, that ideas are produced. This is fatal for absolutist intellectual
freedom because it holds that the intellect is *never* free, but is
always in a relationship with social necessity.

Secondly, and this objection is directly related to the first, it
assumes that individuals are self-sufficient beings who are faced
with society as something that stands apart from them, something which
opposes and oppresses them, rather than as something they are born into
and which produces them. Mill's whole view of freedom is predicated on
this (artificial) separation between individual and society. It
presumes that individuals have inherent freedoms which can only be
constrained (rather than enabled) by society, and so the only question
for Mill is how much social constraint is permissible. It never occurs
to Mill either that individuals are socially produced, or that our
social relationships make possible any conception of individual freedom
in the first place. (This is due, of course, to his class position: it
would never occur to a white bourgeois man that his own freedom was
anything but absolute. The perversity of Mill writing about freedom in
the presence of actual slavery is astonishing).

For both Mill and Habermas, individuals relate to one another
externally, through conversation, argument, and discourse. Because of
their race, class, and gender position, they can safely ignore the
question of power - they see the world as populated entirely by individuals with
the same power and privilege as themselves. The third objection to Mill
and Habermas is that the ideal speech situation, the one which convinces
and forces reconsideration, is at best rare and at worst a complete
illusion. 

Raymond Geuss, in his [article on Habermas' 90th
birthday](https://thepointmag.com/politics/a-republic-of-discussion-habermas-at-ninety/),
sums up the problem with the Mill and Habermas position: 

>a noted
problem is that liberals seem to presuppose - although they don't
usually admit it, and certainly do not draw attention to it - that
discussion is always possible, and always a good thing, assuming, of
course - a huge idealizing assumption, but one liberals are in general
willing to make - that the situation is not an emergency with imminent
danger to life and limb in which action must be taken immediately.

In *Confronting the Democratic Discourse* I call this the problem of
lives and time: because of their subject position (which includes
relative safety from violence and poverty), many liberal librarians are
unable to understand that lives (Indigenous lives, Black lives, Trans
lives, Disabled lives) are currently being taken, and that climate change
means we no longer have all the time in the world to reach a consensus
(as if we ever did). This social position also allows liberals to
exclude material questions (including questions of bodies) from their
conceptions of liberty. Reading Mill, one is struck by how the only
things up for discussion are opinions, beliefs, ideas. It is impossible
for him to understand that, for Black Americans at the time he was
writing (1859), it is not their ideas and opinions that are threatened,
but their physical freedom, their very lives.

Geuss goes on to say that,

>In any case, it is important to recognize that [liberal] assumptions
>are actually empirically false. Discussions, even discussions that take
>place under reasonably favourable conditions, are not necessarily
>enlightening, clarifying or conducive to fostering consensus. In fact,
>they just as often foster polemics, and generate further bitterness,
>rancor and division.

This, of course, lies at the heart of the rift between defenders of
IF-absolutism in Canada and their critics, and between defenders of
austerity and labour exploitation in the UK and *their* critics. Faced
with criticism, followers of Mill and Habermas can be expected to keep
an open mind, to be prepared to reconsider based on new information and
better arguments, right? After all that's the philosophy underlying
intellectual freedom and liberal-democratic librarianship...

And yet, Vickery Bowles was considered brave and upstanding for her
direct admission that she was ["not going to reconsider"](https://www.cbc.ca/radio/asithappens/as-it-happens-thursday-edition-1.5324424/i-m-not-going-to-reconsider-toronto-s-top-librarian-refuses-to-bar-speaker-critical-of-transgender-rights-1.5324431) her stance on room
rentals. In a response to a resolution put forward by its membership,
CILIP rejected putting the resolution up to the challenge of competing
points of view, thus allowing the truth to emerge through a process of
consensus, and preferred to try to manage its private partnership
problem internally, behind closed doors. As we have seen from documents
released under the Canadian Freedom of Information Act, Toronto Public
Library *also* preferred to try to manage its room rental problem in
secret, rather than being open to the criticism and challenge of other
arguments. More recently, CILIP refused to reconsider its ill-advised
paean to Dominic Cummings in the face of membership criticism. 

As we can see, neither CILIP nor TPL (and by extension the organizations
that supported TPL) conform to *their own principles of intellectual
freedom*. While lecturing critics on the importance of "all
perspectives" and the democratic indispensibility of absolutist IF, IF
defenders were violating the very precepts of their own position. If, as
IF-absolutism defenders maintain, IF is a *procedural* application of
liberal principles in order to improve knowledge and approach the truth,
then violating those procedures is incoherent, if not simply
hypocritical.

Fundamentally, what is lacking in the Mill and Habermas philosophy of IF
and, indeed, in many other areas of social relationships, is any
understanding of power. Geuss again:

>No amount of human exertion will suffice to permit us to establish
>within the domain of the natural phenomenon "communication" a safe-zone
>that is actually completely protected on all sides from the possible
>use of force, nor can we even realistically anticipate in some utopian
>sense a form of communication where relations of domination were
>completely suspended or canceled out.

In reality, then, libraries can either put their weight behind (say)
trans people and workers, or behind those who threaten them. There is no
neutral third option. And yet, such a utopian impossibility is precisely what libraries, their CEOs,
and our professional organizations base their IF rhetoric on. They do
not understand that *as state institutions*, *as professional
associations*, they automatically possess and confer prestige,
authority, and power on anything that goes on under their auspices. As a
result, they lend support to particular social and political commitments
(like transphobia or austerity) while insisting on the inapplicability
of the question of power to their positions or behaviour. Until
libraries and those who hold hierarchical power within them fully take
on board the issue of power (in all its forms), and the problem of lives
and times, the same rifts and divisions we currently see in the
profession are only going to get worse. 
