---
layout: post
title: Ideology and Intellectual Freedom
date: 2020-01-17
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Very often in this blog I have attacked the individualist, liberal
conception of freedom in general and intellectual freedom in particular.
In this post I want to offer an alternative conception of intellectual
freedom that might have the potential to avoid some of the absolutist
pitfalls that attend the current conception hegemonic within the
profession. To begin with, I want to quote from David Harvey's first
political book, *Social Justice and the City*. There, he defines the
difference between the commonly-used definition of ideology and the
Marxist understanding of the word:

>Marx gives a specific meaning to ideology - he regards it as an
>*unaware* expression of the underlying ideas and beliefs which attach
>to a particular social situation, in contrast to the *aware* and
>critical exposition of ideas in their social context which is
>frequently called ideology in the west.

For Marx, ideologies arise out of the social relationships prevailing in
a given society: relationships of power, oppression, exchange,
affection, domination, etc. These relationships in turn arise out of the
particular economic organization of society: a society in which some
people can only live by selling the one commmodity they own - labour
power - to the people who own everything else produces particular social
relationships and therefore particular ideas and ideologies. Fredric
Jameson describes ideology (following Althusser) as the ways in which
people make sense of the complex, rich, hidden realities of their social
life, especially when those realities run counter to their own values,
stories, and images of themselves. In this sense, racist assumptions are an
ideological reflection of the realities of colonialism that colonizers
and settlers do not want to face up to and are different from an openly
adopted racist ideology. The subtle nature of ideologies is why the
racist ideology produced in those who benefit from a racist society is
so hard to admit when it is pointed out. The liberal ideology that
underwrites the dominant conception of intellectual freedom is different
from the Liberal political ideology. They both end up at the same place,
but one is an openly avowed set of ideas and values, the other is a
more-or-less unconscious set of ideas and values instilled in people via
the social relationships in which they grow up. You can be a liberal (or
a racist) without being a Liberal (or a member of the KKK).

Liberalism tends to deny the first definition of ideology. Liberalism
sees ideas, thoughts, and values as a free choice of free individuals.
When a person reaches the "age of discretion" then they, as
self-determining adults, decide for themselves what they think about
things, what they consider important, what their values are.
Intellectual freedom is the *defense* of this freedom, which is the
result of a taken-for-granted individual agency (liberty); it is the
(presumed) freedom of individuals to intellectually engage with
information, thoughts, data, etc, etc.

But non-liberal theories like Marxism, as I've written before, argue
that such liberty is an illusion. It takes the structuring effects of
social relations seriously, and therefore it takes ideology seriously.
Our intellectual activity is *always already* structured by forces and
relationships outside ourselves; we are not *free* in any absolute or
unqualified sense. We cannot, for example, choose to have spoken a
different language from that spoken in the home we grew up in. Ideology
is one outcome of the structuring effect of society; indeed, it is one
of the core purposes of society: to pass along values, ideas, and
understanding from one generation to the next so that learning is not
lost, knowledge condemned to be reacquired with every generation.
Ideology is not, in itself, a bad thing.

What this means, though, is that the self-directed intellectual activity
of the liberal individual is a myth. It doesn't exist, it has never
existed. Everything librarians think of as "upholding intellectual
freedom" only upholds the subtle, unconscious ideology of
liberal-capitalism. *This* is why intellectual freedom and "neutrality"
occupy such a central place in the rhetoric and discourse of
librarianship: because their function is to enable the ideological
reproduction (and thereby the social reproduction more generally) of
capitalist society itself. We have to challenge the "neutral", liberal
conception of intellectual freedom not only because we have other values
that we also want to uphold (collective values, community values, social
justice values), but also because the intellectual freedom that is
hegemonic within the profession is there to reproduce the ideologies of
capitalism, including its racism, sexism, transphobia, homophobia. These
ideologies are not *accidental*, are not simply misunderstandings that
can be cleared up through recourse to more information or a better
argument. They are reflections of real inequalities and oppressive
structures integral to the (by definition exploitative) capitalist mode of production. They can't be extinguished simply through debate or an
exhortation to *think differently*. They can only be extinguished
through a change in the material forces and the social relations of
society.

This could be read as an argument for quietism, for inaction, for
waiting for the world to change for new values, ideas, etc, to take
hold. But that is not what I am arguing, because the relationship of
material forces to ideology is not a one-way, simple determinism. Ideas
feed back into our collective lives, our collective struggles, into how
we relate to the world.  What I am arguing for is a
conception of intellectual freedom that takes this situation seriously,
that recognizes that transphobia is not just ignorance, not just
misunderstanding, not amenable to debate and discussion, but serves an
ideological purpose in capitalist society which must be confronted and
challenged. In Jim Turk's writings on intellectual freedom there is an implication that the library's job is to set aside space for *other people to change the world at some unspecified point in the future*, that liberal intellectual freedom is there to enable a progress in ideas. But it cannot do this if it is not also engaged in trying to change our social relations. Intellectual freedom in this sense *must take sides*, must commit to the values that we want to see in the world, because these ideas have ontological status also. In order to change the world we have to defend alternative social relationships, because these alternatives provide blueprints for the changes to come. A non-liberal, non-absolutist IF must see itself not as protecting some already existing innate freedom but as actively working *to free* the intellect from ignorance and capitalist, patriarchal, racist, transphobic ideology. This would be an IF committed to something other than the status quo.

What would this *other* look like? Well, that probably doesn't need to
be pinned down too closely, but we can see a hint of it in the library
values that often fall by the wayside, trumped by an absolute deference
to liberal intellectual freedom: community, collectivity, solidarity,
equality.
From my perspective, this means constituent power: the unlimited, and
unlimitable self-determination of the community, unconstrainted by
institutionally, organizationally, or economically constituted power. It
is possible, as we saw in Toronto, for a community to decide *for
itself* the values it wants to hold and uphold.

Which brings me to another straw-person argument deployed by
IF-absolutists like Jim Turk: the idea that any infringement of liberal
intellectual freedom is automatically the equivalent to the Chinese
government imprisoning dissident artists. It's a disingenuous argument
because no critic of IF-absolutism would come down on the side of the
state in a case like that. But for liberals, there is no
difference between the constituted power of sovereignty and the state,
on the one hand, and the self-determining action of the community on the
other. This is the horseshoe theory as applied to intellectual freedom,
and it is as disingenuous as the horseshoe theory applied in any other
context. Again, this position derives from classical liberal political
theory, in which the bourgeoisie (the middle class) occupies a tense and
unstable middle ground between the authority of church and state, and
the unruly mob. For liberal ideology, there really is no difference
between autocracy and full democracy: both, to liberals, are tyrannical,
a positioned enshrined in the social contract theorists, notably Hobbes.

The version of intellectual freedom I am proposing is less a noun -
static, present, a defensible status quo - than it is a verb:
intellectual freedom must mean *the freeing of the intellect*, the
*leading out* (ex-ducere, educating) of intellectual activity from
ignorance and prejudice. Liberal intellectual freedom is passive, it
waits to be manipulated by charlatans and bigots and calls that
neutrality; the kind of intellectual freedom I am thinking about is
active, a commitment to an intellectual life shared by all and lived in
common.

