---
layout: post
title: Intellectual Freedom as Negative Liberty
date: 2020-11-17
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

In the last blog post, I criticized the idea that Intellectual Freedom
is an origin. Intellectual Freedom as origin is mixed confusingly with
Intellectual Freedom as outcome, which can also be criticized from a
social justice perspective. But I want to stay on the topic of IF as
origin here, because it connects to another concept in political
philosophy, that of negative freedom.

Isaiah Berlin, in his "Two Concepts of Freedom" (1969), distinguishes between a
"normal" view of freedom, in which no one is obstructed from doing what
they want (negative liberty), and a positive view, in which freedom
consists in determining my own way of live, choosing for myself, etc.
Berlin admits that these two views of liberty don't seem to be "at great
logical distance from each other", but nevertheless he draws a sharp
distinction between them, not only in their historical origins and
trajectories, but in their potential political consequences. Positive
liberty, in Berlin's view, when extended to a social body, leads people
to "justify the coercion of some men by others in order to raise them to
a 'higher' level of freedom". We can see here the spectre of
totalitarianism as well as the seeds of libertarianism.

I am drastically over-simplifying here, but it is true to say that
negative liberty holds primacy for Berlin, and with it a liberal
pluralism which "[it] seems to me a truer and more humane ideal than the
goals of those who seek in the great, disciplined, authoritarian
structures the ideal of 'positive' self-mastery by classes, or peoples,
or the whole of mankind".

We can see here one of the philosophical justifications for the
"neutral" proceduralism that operates as if the liberal state or liberal
society is agnostic with respect to the good. Charles Taylor takes issue
with Berlin's dismissal of positive liberty in his 1985 essay, "What's
Wrong with Negative Liberty?" For Taylor, the totalitarian threat is an
exaggeration which might well form the "inner logic" of (Taylor's
understanding of) Marxism, but is nonetheless a caricature. Taylor wants
to rehabilitate the positive conception of freedom in the face of
Berlin's dismissal. (Positive liberty will form the basis of Taylor's
critique of libertarianism as well as his justification of objective
moral frameworks in *Sources of the Self*).

However, like the two principles of justice I have written about before,
*both* positive and negative liberty as formulated by Berlin and Taylor
are predicated on an individualistic, autonomous view of human subjects.
Negative liberty - which has a political expression in social contract
theory - sees individuals as "pre-social" with rights and liberties that
pertain to them originally. Any infringement on these "natural" rights
and liberties is a violation because such rights and liberties take
(logical, legal, and historical) precedence. Rawls' principle of the
equality of opportunity is connected with this idea.

Positive liberty, by contrast, sees freedom as an outcome (the outcome
of education, or a process of self-mastery), and we can see this most
clearly in Kant's notion of Enlightenment as emancipation. This kind of
liberty is the result of a project of self-improvement and
self-liberation. Such self-liberation, from the Kantian perspective,
includes liberation from the sway or influence of other people. In this
way, a moderate positive liberty can avoid the threat of totalitarianism
while avoiding what Taylor sees as the drawbacks of negative liberty
(e.g. that negative liberty is a necessary but not a sufficient
condition for freedom). 

However, both Berlin and Taylor as liberals see "freedom" as a)
something that "belongs" to individuals (whether as origin or as
outcome) and b) as something that owes nothing to the constraints of
historical necessity. If I am born into an English-speaking household,
my "freedom" (to speak German) is constrained by this fact. Similarly,
if I am born into a country which drives on the right side of the road,
no amount of negative liberty or positive emancipation will justify my
driving on the left (in the case, for example, where I kill someone).

The Marxist conception of freedom - discounted by Berlin from a fear of
totalitarianism and by Taylor through a straw-man vulgar Marxism -
contradicts both of points a) and b). Freedom is not something that
belongs to individuals, because there are no individuals outside social
relations, and those social relations always impose constraints and
obligations. Freedom recognizes the constraints and affordances of
historical necessity. We can think of these are synchronic and
diachronic constraints on freedom which are unavoidable but which are
generally dismissed by liberal conceptions of freedom.

Just as intellectual freedom owes most to the *origin* theory of
freedom, with an admixture of the *outcome* theory, so it owes most to
the negative conception of liberty (freedom from censorship) with an
admixture of the positive (independence and education as requirements
for a healthy democracy). Again, these are not clearly defined within
the concept of IF, but are messily and chaotically mixed together.

What liberal theories of freedom avoid, and which Marxism embraces, is a
theory of historical causality. Taylor, in the *Sources of the Self*
tries to head off this critique by claiming 1) that by not including 
"diachronic-causal" explanation in his account of the making of modern
identity, he doesn't mean to say it isn't important and b) that
diachronic-causal explanations are so messy and chaotic that they don't
really tell us anything anyway. Individuals freely and rationally choose
their own paths, either originarily or as the outcome of a process of
self-emancipation.

For Marxists, on the other hand, similarly to many social construction
theorist, individuals are produced by the world they are born into (the
diachronic and synchronic structures identified above). The Hegelian
view might be that individual personalities are "expressions" of an underlying
totality, while a structuralist view sees people as created by their
differential position within a vast structure of structures. Each moment
in the diachronic movement of the whole produces synchronic structures
in which we are all embedded. It is this movement over time that
prevents the Marxist view from being completely deterministic. Roy
Bhaskar, in his taxonomy of individual/society relations, describes the
structural form as "transformational", in which structures produce
individuals and individuals produce structures. In this context,
"freedom" takes on a radically different cast than either Berlin or
Taylor's view, but it is also radically different from the vulgar,
determinist, totalitarian Marxism Taylor dismisses.

This third way of looking at freedom - different from both positive and
negative conceptions of liberty - has, I think, huge consequences for
intellectual freedom. It denies any kind of absolute liberty either as
origin or as outcome, and in its place proposes a conception of
individual agency (physical, social, and intellectual) that both
produce, reproduce, and are (re-)produced by them. Social change,
therefore, rules out any question of the coercion of individuals, and
focuses instead on what kind of coordinate, cooperative action amongst
individuals can change the structures that need to be changed to ensure
a just future.
