---
layout: post
title: Theory and Commitment
date: 2020-04-04
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Yesterday, I was reading Baylis, Smith, and Owens' *The Globalization of
World Politics*, an introductory textbook in International Relations.
One of the first things the authors do (in the "Introduction" no less)
is to layout the various theoretical approaches to IR, three
"mainstream" approaches (Realism, Liberalism, Social Constructivism)
and four that I would call "critical" (Marxism, poststructuralism,
feminism, postcolonialism). International Relations, then, takes not
just for granted, but as its starting point, a set of worked out
theoretical approaches that have currency within the field. While LIS is
marked - especially lately - by a multiplicity of theoretical
approaches, the field lacks the kind of self-awareness that would be
able to put together an introductory chapter similar to this one.

I think this lack of self-awareness comes from a few places, which I'll
get to in a moment, but first I want to talk about what I see as two
main consequences of this lack of theoretical self-awareness. On the one
hand, it means that the underlying liberalism that dominates LIS is
still able to present itself as a common-sense empiricism. The
liberalism of LIS claims to have a corner on "the facts", and most often
assumes its own foundational epistemology (= provable truth claims) as
already given. This is why, on the one hand, it is so difficult to argue
against defenders of IF absolutism who implicitly rely on liberalism; they
don't admit that their liberalism is one ideology out of many, rather,
they claim for it the status of unmediated knowledge. This is also why
panels on Intellectual Freedom and mainstream articles (I'm thinking now
of recent articles by Wiegand and Buschman) can completely ignore the
entire body of critical librarianship that has appeared, say, in the
last five years. Their unaware liberalism precludes them from taking
seriously anything "ideological" (i.e. political), in other words anything that takes the
relationship of truth and power seriously and which therefore involves
us in real political commitments. Of course, there are also very real
power relations involved here too: the liberal mainstream has a lock on
dominant positions in the profession, have the loudest voices, have the
most platforms, etc, and they aim to keep it that way.

The other consequence of this lack of self-awareness, as I see it, is
the eclectic treatment of theoretical approaches as a grab-bag or
toolkit, from which a researchers may take whatever they need to fit
their current research program. So, while one might take a
poststructuralist approach relying on Foucault when looking at
surveillance in libraries, one might take a Marxist approach when
looking at labour, ignoring the fact that poststructuralist commitments
tend to be very different from Marxist ones (though the relationship of
Foucault to Marxism is a complicated one). The IR textbook makes it very
clear that theoretical approaches are not simply *methodological*
requirements, but are directly and inextricably related to the way one
understands the world (i.e. there is no "objective" research position). Someone who understands the world through a
Marxist lens cannot simply turn around and adopt a liberal perspective
simply because a given methodology demands it. This is the problem, as I
see it, with the recuperation of Gramsci to a particularly liberal
perspective on intellectual freedom: it erases his radically Marxist
worldview, keeping only those aspects of his thought palatable to
liberalism.

Now, this doesn't mean that certain combinations of theoretical
orientation aren't possible: my own Marxism is flavoured by certain
poststructuralist ways of thinking about knowledge and power, for
example, and Marxism informs (sometimes antagonistically) many of the
theoretical commitments of feminism, poststructuralism, and
postcolonialism (I would add Critical Race Theory and Queer Theory to the list of
perspectives currently dominant within critical librarianship). But we
need to be clear on how those tendencies interrelate and how they change
the political commitments they impose on us. For example, the
poststructuralist flavoured Marxism I adopt means I care more about a
kind of anarchic democracy-from-below than about the dictatorship of the
proletariat, or at least that my understanding of that dictatorship is
swayed by poststructuralism's m's suspicion of authority...

There are two main reasons, I think, why mainstream LIS lacks the
self-awareness of its own liberalism, its own theoretical and political
commitments, and why the theoretical richness of, say, critical
librarianship is so threatening. On the one hand, there is the
longstanding and everpresent ambiguity between LIS as an academic
discipline and LIS as training for librarians. I suspect there has
always been a reluctance within LIS to really hash out these theoretical
and politicl differences because a) we're too polite and conflict-averse
and b) because there are many within the library schools who feel this
kind of theoretical debate is an irrelevant distraction from the job of
training (or being trained as) librarians. This is obviously related to
the tension between librarianship as (some kind of) profession and
librarianship as a job, and runs immediately up against the practicality
and pragmatism of the profession itself. These antagonisms, too, have a
long history, marked by the gender divisions of 19th century
librarianship between a philosophical, gentlemanly, idealized, scholarly
profession for men, and the practical, hand's-on work reserved for what
Dee Garrison has called "the tender technicians".

On the other hand, after the wholesale adoption of naturalistic
positivism in the 20s and 30s, many social sciences drew back from an
extreme positivism in the 1960s, but LIS has not. We are still very much
bound by positivist thinking (for example, in evidence-based
LIS and the "objective" value of systematic reviews), and it
is this positivism that raises an unacknowledged liberalism to the
status of empirical knowledge and reduces all other theories to the
status of non-rigorous, non-scientific ideology. Such ideologies might
be suitable for particular research projects which require more
theoretical insight than an unconscious, hegemonic liberalism can
provide, but those approaches should be seen as aberrations rather than
as entailing particular commitments which cannot simply be cast aside
when another methodology dictates.

When I was at the CARL Research Institute a couple of years ago, a
health sciences librarian with a background in the natural sciences
asked why any discussion of theory was relevant to a course on research.
She didn't need or use any theory, she claimed, she simply worked from
"the facts". My favourite counter-example to this kind of claim from
natural scientists are tools such as the microscope. Does the microscope
present an unmediated view of a slide to the eye? What are the
theoretical concepts (optics, lens theory, etc) that go into the design
and construction of the microscope, and how are those theories erased in
order to allow the use of the microscope appear unmediated? What about
an electron microscope, is that still unmediated sense-perception? And
so on. 

Baylis, Smith, and Owens warn the student that they 

>do not think that
theory is an option. It is not as if you can say you do not want to
bother with a theory; all you want to do is look at the 'facts'. We
believe that this is impossible, since the only way you can decide which
of the millions of possible facts is by adhering to some simplifying
device that tells you which ones matter the most. Theory is such a
simplifying device. Note also that you may well not be aware of your
theory. It may just be the view of or even the ideology about the world
that you inherited from family, social class, peer groups, or the media.
It may just seem common sense to you and not at all complicated like a
theory. But we fervently believe that in such a case your theoretical
assumptions are implicit rather than explicit. We prefer to try to be as
explicit as possible when it comes to thinking about world politics.

This explicitness is one of the things missing from library schools and
mainstream LIS scholarship. I'm thinking back to my own "Information in
Society" class, when the professor claimed that untrue knowledge was not
knowledge and therefore had no causal effects, to which I pointed out that the Americans had just
invaded Iraq based on untrue knowledge. But I'm also thinking of the
ways in which writers from a critical perspective *have* to engage with
mainstream LIS scholarship (Wiegand, Buschman are two clear examples),
but the reverse is not true: mainstream LIS, with its unacknowledged,
common-sense, hegemonic liberalism, can afford to ignore critical
approaches because they are *obviously* and *objectively* true while the
rest of us toil away on our ineffective and pointless ideological
fantasies. The subaltern position of critical librarianship is connected
to a whole host of historical political problems and dynamics within the
field, but it is interesting to see these problems and dynamics play out
in real time when yet another paper on libraries and society is
published by a mainstream LIS scholar that cites no work done within
critical librarianship.
