---
layout: post
title: Liberal Proceduralism and Mandates
date: 2020-08-26
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

One of the questions that has occurred to me since the beginning of the
pandemic is why governments seemed reluctant to actually mandate
anything. By their nature, governments are not libertarian - despite the
"small government" protestations of conservatives and populists - and
they [clearly relish the deployment of state violence in the form of
militarized
police](https://truthout.org/articles/if-governments-believe-so-much-in-nonviolence-they-should-try-it/), so why the reliance on "common sense" and trusting
people to "do the right thing" which is the position taken, in various
ways, by the British government and the Federal Canadian and Provincial
government Albertan governments.

One of the foundations of liberal political thought (which even
ostensibly conservative parties and governments tend to adopt) is that
the state operates through policies and procedures (i.e. laws and
regulations) which are neutral with respect to any particular conception
of what is good. Drawing on the atomized individualism that lies at the
heart of liberal thinking, every individual has their own conception of
what the good life is, and in order to be fair and impartial, the state
does not take sides in this. The application of universal laws and
regulations, irrespective (ostensibly) of race, gender, class,
sexuality, or disability, is what ensures fairness and equality in a
liberal society (hence the liberal insistance, for example, on
"post-racial colour-blindness"). This does not mean that a liberal society is
egalitarian - indeed it relies on what is sees as "natural"
inequalities, such as wealth - but that the state, conceived as a
necessary evil, as the power of the collective over the individual, is
constrained to a procedural equality, an equality of application of the
law. 

This idea was explicitly formulated in Ronald Dworkin's 1978 essay on
Liberalism, and was described succinctly by Charles Taylor in his 1992
essay on the politics of recognition:

>The reason that the polity as such can espouse no substantial view,
>cannot, for instance, allow that one of the goals of legislation should
>be to make people virtuous in one or another meaning of the that term,
>is that this would involve a violation of its procedural norm. For,
>given the diversity of modern societies, it would unfailingly be the
>case that some people and not others would be committed to the favored
>conception of virtue.

Those who are not committed to the "favored conception of virtue" would
then find the the equal application of government procedures (laws,
regulations) did not apply to them; their "equal rights" would therefore
be infringed. 

We can see the connection to library neutrality here: the library, as an
organ of the state, adopts this liberal proceduralism and stands aloof
from any "competing" conceptions of the good (transmisia vs. trans lives,
for example), assuming that by doing this - by renting meeting space to
anyone, and giving everying an "equal" platform to express their views -
it is achieving what Dworkin and Taylor think of as procedural virtue
but not substantive virtue. Public libraries stick to their guns on this
because - acknowledged or not - they believe in the individualistic and
procedural commitments of liberal politics.

The pandemic challenges all of this. Early on, people were exhorted to
think of more than themselves, to act in solidarity, to repress their
individual desires in the name of the greater good. Many of us did just
that. But that this has not, in the long run, worked - anti-mask
sentiment is now widespread, for example, and for many people life has
gone back "to normal" - should come as no surprise, given that the
individual and their desire forms the basis of hegemonic liberal
political thinking, and that the neoliberal period has been the
exaltation of that individualism after a (in hindsight, brief) period of
social solidarity and compromise after the second world war. The
corrosive nature of individualism - the "me decade" of the 70s, the
"decade of greed" of the 80s - has made any large-scale,
concerted movement of social solidarity in the capitalist centres nearly
impossible (one
of the main obstacles to large-scale left-wing organization here).
Countries in Asia have done better, and we have seen mutual aid groups pop up
all across North America, but in general, the absolute individualism inculcated
in North American citizens over the past forty years has proved an
insurmountable obstacle to the kind of large-scale social discipline
needed to quickly contain the outbreak (the US and Britain are the two
worst offenders here, as they were the two most nakedly neoliberal of
Western states). By leaving "virtue" as a matter of individual
choice, social, collective virtue becomes almost impossible.

But the pandemic also challenged the idea of state neutrality with
respect to any particular conception of the good. Public health, the
avoidance of death on a mass scale, became simply one conception of the
good among many, and the liberal state had to maintain its agnostic
position with respect to it. My own provincial government, for example,
has refused to mandate mask usage, leaving it to individual cities to
pass unenforcable bylaws on their own. The sacred cow of individual
choice remains inviolate (And of course, individual choice is a key
component of the consumerism that must be deployed to "restart the
economy"). Perversly, the implementation of public health
policy to save lives is seen as an unwarranted infringement on
individual autonomy - the weirdly logical conclusion of centrist
"bothsidesism". Unfortunately, this has led to other
individuals - grocery checkout clerks, wait staff - having to take on
the unenviable task of enforcing local policy, and having to deal with
the angry face of entitled "rugged individualists" moistly spouting off
about their rights. Liberal procedural individualism always comes at the
expense of marginalized people. 

I'm not arguing that the capitalist state *ought* to be deploying
well-armed police to ensure the implementation of fascist policy, but I
do want to point out the limitations inherent in the bourgeois
conception of the state itself. Limitations meant to ensure the
sovereignty of individual "freedom" make it impossible for the state to
develop and implement vitally important policies and procedures when
they become necessary.

But of course, the idea that the liberal state is *in fact* neutral or
agnostic with respect to any substantive good is ridiculous. It simply
takes certain goods for granted and (knowingly or not) supports them.
Individualism, for example - individual "freedom" - is a good that the
bourgeois state - and its organs, like the library - supports. But like
so many "goods" of white supremacist, patriarchal capital, individualism
is an "unmarked good", the dominant side of an artificial binary: white,
male, property-owning, cisgendered, straight, etc. The liberal
conception of the neutral state, what Michael Sandel calls the
"procedural republic" is absolutely committed to particular conceptions
of the good: the good of racial capitalism. It is pure ideological
mystification to pretend otherwise. In "normal" times this mystification
operates fairly smoothly (the ideological machine is effective and
efficient) but in times of crisis, such as the pandemic and the
uprisings in the US, it becomes exposed as the naked mechanism of class,
race, and gendered power that it is. 

ADDENDUM: I forgot to mention that this unwillingness to take a
substantive position on the good is what underlies government's reliance
on "Behavioural Economics" (i.e. nudge theory). Jana Bacevic has written
a really good piece on social theory, behavioural economics, and the
pandemic: ["No Such Thing as Society? Liberal Paternalism, Politics of
Expertise and the Corona
Crisis"](https://discoversociety.org/2020/03/20/no-such-thing-as-society-liberal-paternalism-politics-of-expertise-and-the-corona-crisis/)
