---
layout: post
title: Social Assumptions in Intellectual Freedom
date: 2020-05-25
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

In critical theory circles, one of the ways "critique" functions is by
exposing the assumptions made by proponents of a particular theory or
worldview. Sometimes these assumptions are unconscious, but whether they
are consciously-held or not, they are always withheld or not made
explicit by the discourse in question. This is one of the things Kant
tried to do in his Critiques, it is what Hegel tried to do in his
critique of Kant, and it is Marx's focus in his critique of Political
Economy. What has become apparent in the discourse of intellectual
freedom is that there a set of social and political assumptions being
made which, whether or not they are consciously or unconsiously held,
are never made explicit. Because they are not made explicit, their
political commitments do not become part of the discussion or debate
around IF, and they end up either setting the terms of the discussion
(when critics might think the terms themselves need to be different), or
they force adherents and critics to have completely separate discussions
cut off from each other.

In a [CFE blog post from April
27](https://cfe.ryerson.ca/blog/2020/04/should-public-library-boards-embrace-intellectual-freedom-their-institutional-soul)
Alvin Schrader reiterates the absolutist view of intellectual freedom in
libraries. Despite the title of the blog post being in the form of a
question "should public library boards embrace intellectual freedom as
their institutional soul", Schrader is not interested in answering that
question. His answer appears in the first sentence of the blog post: "I
want first to address the fundamental role and value of the public
library in Canadian communities - its 'value proposition', grounded in
intellectual freedom - and then make a case for intellectual freedom as
the institutional soul of the public library". This is setting up a
circular argument: libraries' value proposition "grounded in intellectual
freedom" is used to support the idea of intellectual freedom at the
centre of librarianship. Schrader's conception of intellectual freedom
is assumed to be the right one, and is then used to answer the question
of intellectual freedom itself.

There is much to critique in Schrader's piece. It is clear that, despite
mentioning some of the critical positions, Schrader has not seriously
engaged with critics of intellectual freedom absolutism. Schrader
unironically and without nuance repeats the democratic discourse of
librarianship without indicating that the very fact of democracy is
subject to debate and contestation.

But there is a *particular* set of assumptions that I want to challenge
here. I have talked a lot about the democratic discourse, so there's no
point rehashing that argument. Rather, what I want to focus on is
the self-determining individualistic social ontology that Schrader - and
most liberal defenders of IF - take for granted. Schrader writes that
the Supreme Court of Canada "provides insights into three key principles
that shed light on why intellectual freedom is so fundamental to the
Canadian body politic", but he takes for granted the idea that the
Supreme Court somehow transcends the social and political struggles in
which all institutions are embedded. This is unsurprising, the Supreme
Court - like libraries and the conception of intellectual freedom - have
to be described in objective, politically neutral terms in order for the
socio-political and economic system to maintain and reproduce itself.
Distrust of institutions challenges the capitalist order. Schrader here
simply applies to the Supreme Court the assumption
of neutrality that has been so roundly criticized within librarianship
itself. A commitment to the neutrality of libraries, IF, and the Supreme
Court are all part of the same process of legitimation the upholds a
"neutral" view of the Canadian state itself. What on the surface appears
to be a fairly uncontroversial statement of fact becomes ends up
supporting very particular political commitments.

One of the principles the Supreme Court has upheld is that "freedom of
expression is instrumental to democratic governance and citizen
partipation in social and political decision-making". What I have argued
in *Confronting the Democratic Discourse of Librarianship* is that
"democratic governance" and "citizen participation" are ideological
presumptions made about the state of Canadian society and politics,
again for particular political purposes. My own perspective - which I
try always to make explicit - is that there is no democratic governance
in Canada, and there is no meaningful citizen participation in
decision-making. Just prior to the coronavirus pandemic we were dealing
with Indigenous blockades against pipeline development, the latest
instance in a long tradition of Indigenous resistance in the face of
social and political ("democratic") exclusion. Similarly, Canadian
citizens find themselves the "owners" of the Trans Mountain pipeline
expansion project, a decision approved by Cabinet and subject to no
democratic oversight or citizen participation at all. I could go on.

But the heart of the assumptions Schrader is making, the one that I want
to single out as the most unassuming of social assumptions made by
liberal defenders of IF like Schrader and Turk, is the following:

>[U]nfettered discourse fosters individual self-fulfillment and
self-actualization, and thus directly engages individual human
dignity... the open exchange of ideas encourses the search for knowledge
and truth; intellectual freedom is the only pathway to individual and
collective truth-seeking.

Unfettered discourse, individual self-fulfillment and
self-actualization: these are all presented as uncontroversial *facts*
about our society. And yet, there are many, many thinkers, scholars, and
activists out there who deny these very facts. Simply to repeat them as
facts, as Schrader and Turk do, is not to make an argument or convince
us that they are the case. In that sense, they do indeed become
*ideological* (less of a bad word for me than for Schrader, for obvious
reasons). Schrader subscribes to a view of individual identity and
social relationships (including discourse) that is of long standing in
liberal philosophy: the idea that (somehow) individuals are not subject
to social relationships that pre-exist them, that they are not born into
social relationships (including language), cultures (including values
and ideas), and dynamics of power. This idea has been disproved by
sociologists, anthropologists, historians, and political theorists. And
yet it is one of the mose deeply embedded ideological constructs of our
so-called liberal democracies. Marx dealt with its presence in 18th
century political economy by dismissing it as a "Robinsonade", the
myth of a self-sufficient bourgeois gentleman (erasing Friday). It
reappears in Thoreau, and we all know how reliant he was upon the
support and labour of his own (female) social relations. It is present
in Kant (the categories of space, time, and causality are inexplicable
to Kant except as innate ideas; he does not understand that we learn
these categories when we are babies). It is present in the social
contract theorists, for whom individuals living their best lives
*decide* to *come together* after the fact to form a society. None of
these social and political conceptions are tenable, and yet they form
part of the unspoken social and political assumption Schrader relies
upon in his defense of IF.

This ideology is not accidental. It is the ideology *required* by
cis-gendered, heterosexual, white, patriarchal property owners in order
to maintain their power in the world. They see themselves as "self-made
men" with no social bonds to anyone else (especially not to the women
and servants who perform the necessary labour). They come together in
coffeehouses, the stock exchange, and parliament as independent,
autonomous equals. They are ignorant of the ways their ideas, values,
and discourse have all been produced by generations of social power and
perspectives. There is *no such thing* as unfettered discourse:
discourse arises out of previous discourse, out of the social world
itself, it is *inherited* by people. In a famous formulation in the
*Eighteenth Brumaire*, Marx writes that "the tradition of all dead
generations weighs like a nightmare on the brains of the living". How
can there be such a thing as absolute "intellectual freedom", freedom of
*any unqualified* kind, in a world of such social and intellectual
necessity?

The ideology of individualism informs the debate, and it is difficult to
frame things any other way, precisely because absolutist IF defenders
are not explicit about their own social and political commitments.
Because of this, they can only understand phrases like "intellectual
freedom seems a threat to social justice and must be supplanted by
censorship in the name of equity and inclusion". This sentence only
makes sense from the perspective of individualist bourgeois ideology. If
we reject the corrosive individualist presumption, we can understand
that intellectual freedom can only arise out of collective social
justice, and in that context the term "censorship" disappears.
Censorship and intellectual freedom can only be considered binary
opposites if one presumes individual agency and independent
intellectual self-determination.

The unspoken political commitments in Schrader's piece come closest to
the surface in his discussion of capitalism. Like many contemporary
observers, such as Shoshana Zuboff and Nick Srnicek, Schrader insists on
adding adjectives to capitalism "wild west capitalism, uncontrolled
capitalism, late-stage capitalism, predatory capitalism, disaster
capitalism" in order to salvage capitalism from its various critiques.
For Schrader, there are no problems with capitalism itself, it is merely
"this current form of capitalist democracy" which has "metastasized into
an uncontrollable malignancy". For Schrader (as for John Buschman),
there was a period of "good capitalism" when minority rights were
protected and censors knew their place. Such a period, it should go
without saying, is a complete fabrication, one which does nothing but
prop up the exploitative, violent, oppressive system of capitalism
itself. This is the political project absolutist IF serves.

The remainder of the blogpost relies on the ideological strawperson
Schrader has set up. That critics of absolutist IF are censors who want
less intellectual freedom, rather than scholars and practitioners who
are explicit about their political commitments, who deny the corrosive
individualism of hegemonic liberalism, and who deny that what we are
calling for is censorship. In the absence of any real engagement with
our work, critics of absolutist IF continue to be painted as misguided
censors, extremists. It is not lost on me that this is how Schrader
feels defenders of IF are painted. The difference is that we engage with
Samek's work, Turk's work, Buschman's work, Schrader's work. It is hard
to think that Schrader could to countenance the idea that absolutism in
IF is never defined, if he had read any of the blog posts I and others
have written on the subject. (OTOH, the earliest reference I've seen
to "absolutist" IF is in Michael Gorman).

Anyway, this post is long enough. Needless to say Schrader concludes by
simply repeating the same liberal canards that come up again and again,
like the elision of offense and harm, the distrust and misunderstanding
of intersectionality and overdetermination, of what Hegel thinks of as
"historical subjectivity", vocational awe, and first and foremost, the
democratic discourse of librarianship. I will end, however, with one
more example of the unquestioned and unchallenged assumptions which run
through Schrader's piece:

>In early November 2019, in the midst of the public library meeting room controversies, a close librarian colleague wrote me: “What is most disturbing is so many people seem to have forgotten that we cannot pick and choose when to support free speech, a concept so fundamental to our democratic values and freedoms. As I pinned the poppy on my lapel this morning, I thought about this and all the work there is to do.”

Here we have the whole package: library neutrality ("we cannot pick and
choose"), the democratic discourse, the presumption of already-existing
freedom. But perhaps most pernicious of all the reference to the poppy,
symbol of the recuperation for capitalism of war for profit, war for
geopolitical power, war for the extension of capitalism, war for colonial
oppression. The most ironic thing, though the irony is lost on Schrader,
is that the reference to pinning on the poppy is a perfect example of
how individual "choices" are determined by social, political, and
symbolic power. Schrader's colleague would not have used the poppy in
such a symbolic fashion if they could not expect Schrader to understand
the symbolism. There was no risk of an individual's intellectual freedom
making such symbolic identification impossible. In what sense, really,
were Schrader and his colleague intellectually free to construe the
poppy in any another sense?
