---
layout: post
title: Liberal Proceduralism and Commitment
date: 2020-07-07
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

As part of my PhD research into the political theory of intellectual
freedom and how it plays out in various contexts in Canadian
librarianship, I've been reading Charles Taylor's work on
multiculturalism and the politics of recognition. Glen Sean Coulthard's
*Red Skin, White Masks* also engages with Taylor's work from an
Indigenous perspective, and rejects Taylor's conception of the politics
of recognition because of the way in which Taylor's liberalism can't
recognize the power imbalance between the settler state and Indigenous
communities in Canada. The politics of recognition has also been
challenged from feminist perspectives (Nancy Fraser, for example, argues
that such a politics ignores material redistribution in favour of an
idealist recognition of difference - similar to the performative acts
municipalities and police forces are currently engaged in to prevent
having to deal with material structures of police racism and brutality)
and from Queer perspectives (Dean Spade argues that the recognition and
inclusion of transgender people in hate speech codes [such as Canada's
Bill C-16] further embeds trans people in structures of medicalized
oppression and police transmisia). From the intellectual freedom
perspective, there's another angle that I think is worth exploring in
addition to these ones.

Taylor's primary concern is with the issue of Quebec's "distinct
society" status and Canadian multiculturalism more generally, and fits
into debates within liberal political theory around whether or not
classical liberalism's focus on individual rights was sufficient, or
whether another conception of group, community, or collective rights was
also necessary. Taylor posits two kinds of liberal societies: a
majority, classically liberal society which he equates with "English
Canada", in which individual rights take priority; and a minority
culture such as Quebec in which individual rights are in some way
sacrificed to a collective goal, in this case the *survivance* of
Quebecois culture. For Taylor, the larger ("right" or "default") society is always the
classical liberal one in which procedures are in place to guarantee
individual rights *in order for individuals to pursue their own
conception of what is good* (i.e. what is a good life). The role of the
state, in this view, is to develop and enforce the procedures by which
such rights are upheld. This "procedural liberalism" can be seen in the
responses of IF absolutists to critical challenge. VPL, TPL, and the
Ryerson Centre for Free Expression constantly base their responses to
criticism on individual rights, the procedures which guarantee them (in
the last instance, this means legislation such as the Criminal Code and
the Charter of Rights) and neutrality over any particular conception of
the good. Libraries, like all liberal state institutions, can and must
remain agnostic as to any particular conception of the good, and this
agnosticism holds *even in the face of racism, sexism, transmisia,
ableism, and classism*. It is a core tenet of classical liberalism that
the state and its institutions *must not have an opinion* on what any
individual might consider "good" (white supremacy, for example, or gender essentialism) and therefore
*cannot commit* to any particular form of good. This places the liberal
conception of state institutions at odds, in fact, with any real content
to a statement of values. When Vancouver Public Library, for example,
includes "community-led planning" and "community partnerships" among its
list of values, it is with the unspoken proviso that this planning and
these partnerships cannot commit the library to any conception of the
good that the community might hold. Ostensibly "neutral" Liberal proceduralism must always
trump any conception of the good the community might hold (trans rights,
for example). This is why those values are immediately jettisoned
whenever they threaten liberal proceduralism (e.g. when they require a
commitment to trans rights).

For Taylor, the liberal proceduralist society does not hold any
particular conception of the good, and therefore its set of procedures
allow any individual's conception of the good to be pursued unimpeded.
By contrast, any community's conception of the good (Quebec's, or the
Wet'suwet'en, or the trans community) is only allowable up until it
infringes on the individual rights supported by liberal procedure (i.e.
until it becomes "censorship" or interferes with the economic activity
of the majority society, as the Wet'suwet'en blockades did). The
conflict between these two kinds of society/community is the tension
Taylor wants to explore, and he develops his politics of recognition as
a way to resolve the antagonism.

But Taylor's view of the liberal procedural society/state not committed
to any particular conception of the good is totally false. The liberal
society and state in Canada, the US, or Britain which *claims* to allow
individual conceptions of the good to flourish while itself being
agnostic as to any particular one of them, in fact holds private
property and profit as a social good and directs its energies and
resources - indeed its legal and juridical procedures - to accomplishing
and protecting those conceptions of the good. Because Taylor is an
idealist, he falls for into the idealist trap that if something is not
explicitly spoken (i.e. if the idea is not represented in some kind of
text), then it does not exist. So the fact that the liberal,
settler-colonial state does not admit that it is commited to a
particular (capitalist, white supremacist, patriarchal) concept of the
good means that it must be neutral in that respect. Liberal philosophy,
as the ideology of the bourgeoisie, always takes the capitalist state at
face value.

In this view, then, the proceduralism of the liberal state does not
simply (neutrally) guarantee the rights of individuals, it *commits to
individualism as a good* because individualism (competition, lack of
solidarity) is a requirement for profiting off private property. When it
defends the expression of racism, white supremacy, or transmisia in the name of
intellectual freedom, intellectual freedom becomes merely a euphemism
hiding a liberal procedural commitment to a particular good: the
fracturing of society along the lines of identity, the impossibility of
any kind of collective action, of a community proposing, supporting, and
achieving its own vision of a good society. The problem is that, like
Taylor, and like most white liberal society, librarianship has been
taken in by the idealist, individualist vision of liberal political
theory. It has fallen for the idea that it is a neutral guarantor of the
individual right to pursue one's own conception of the good, and is
therefore oblivious to the fact that it is committed to - and actively
engaged in - the reproduction and maintenance of a particular form of
good (racial capitalism) that is actively harmful to society and the
planet.

I have written before about the need for librarianship to be explicit
about its commitments. One prerequisite for that would be for library
CEOs and their friends at the Ryerson CFE to really interrogate the
liberal political philosophy that (unconsciously) informs their
positions and perspectives, and in particular the racist, patriarchal,
and heteronormative inequalities the "neutral" proceduralism of liberal
society in fact commits them to.
