---
layout: post
title: Censorship and Discursive Power
date: 2020-03-10
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

On Monday, March 9, Toronto City Librarian Vickery Bowles gave a speech
to the Empire Club - formed to ensure the maintenance of the "imperial
bond" between Canada and Britain amid anti-British sentiment in the
early years of the 20th century - in which she argued that the reaction
against TPL's room rental to Meghan Murphy was "shutting down" voices.
In a [column for the National
Post](https://nationalpost.com/opinion/chris-selley-torontos-head-librarian-digs-in-deeper-in-her-defence-of-free-speech),
Chris Selley - who has [weighed in before on this
issue](https://nationalpost.com/opinion/chris-selley-attack-on-public-libraries-for-letting-meghan-murphy-speak-is-a-nauseating-spectacle),
quoted Bowles as follows:

>I consider myself a social justice warrier... My passion for
>librarianship is my commitment to equity and inclusion, and to the
>marginalized communities. And you support those communities by
>supporting intellectual freedom and free speech - because it's those
>voices that are so often being shut down.

>I believe that when I stand up for free speech, allowing Meghan Murphy
>(to speak), I'm standing up for the transgender community and the LGBTQ
>community, because I'm making sure that voices are not being shut down.

Leaving aside for a moment, the contradiction between what Bowles says
she is doing for marginalized communities and what those communities
themselves say she is doing (i.e. it's easy enough to let people speak
when you don't have to listen to what they say), I want to touch on some of the discursive
elements at play here. I've previously [written about Bowles' odd and
unprompted move from "intellectual freedom" discourse to "free speech"
discourse](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2019/11/09/free-speech-and-discourse-analysis.html),
but what I want to touch on here is the discourse of censorship that
surrounds this issue.

The Vancouver and Toronto Public Library reaction against renting space
to Meghan Murphy was never an intellectual freedom issue, and it was
never a censorship issuem but due to the discursive power of the public
library as state apparatus, the Chief Librarians very often are the ones
in control of the narrative. We saw this in Winnipeg Public around
security screening, where it took a well-organized group experienced in
research and communications (Millennium4All) to challenge the library's and the city's
portrayal of the screenings and the justification for them. The Chief
Librarians made this an intellectual freedom and censorship issue, and
those of us who criticize the libraries have had to conform to that
discourse, but in reality this has nothing to do with IF or censorship.

In what follows, I will base the argument on library collections, as
that is the foundation and recurring touchstone of intellectual freedom
absolutist arguments. I believe basing a concept of intellectual freedom purely on
the model of collections is a mistake, but as I will I hope demonstrate,
even that basis undermines IF-absolutist arguments.

In the history of intellectual freedom in libraries, two ideas are
prominent: that libraries are capable of representing *all* points of
view in their collections, and that anything not collected in a library
is by definition unavailable for public access. Neither of these ideas
is correct, and both are based on pre-industrial conditions of
information scarcity which no longer apply (if they ever did). For
reasons of space, budget, and labour-time, libraries can't collect
everything, even if they did not have policies that explicitly exclude
some material. Collection development policies *always* exclude
material: some libraries might exclude zines, others might exclude
self-published racist rants from a community member. Indeed, collections
development prides itself on being *selective* and from a practical
perspective, it cannot be otherwise. 

One could argue that things like approval plans and demand-driven
acquisition moderate policy-based selection, but selection in general
still takes place: whether that's the market-based selection of what
gets published and what does not, or the patron-driven selection at
point of need. As usual with much of the intellectual foundations of
librarianship, the idea that libraries are not selective is based on a
spurious abstract concept of free, frictionless access to resources, and
this abstraction is disproved by actual collection development practice.

On the other side, when a member of the public challenges a book,
IF-absolutists call it censorship, but when the same book is weeded from
the collection according to policy, that is normal collection
development practice. Libraries *never* collect everything or manage to
represent *all* points of view; and indeed, they don't want to. If we
hold on to outdated manuals on health or medicine, presented without
context, we are putting our communities at risk.

Now, IF-absolutists argue that any such contextual pointers are
censorship, because context can, will, and must affect the free choice
of a reader. This "free choice" is however, as I have pointed out
before, part of the liberal illusion of the self-created, self-driven,
isolated individual towards whom society can only ever be antagonistic
(see J.S. Mill's *On Liberty* for the classic statement of this
position). One of the reasons IF-absolutists have such a hard time
understanding and committing to the idea of community is that their
entire intellectual toolkit is based on this kind of corrosive
individualism.

Turning now to the idea that information not provided by a library, or
not represented in its collections, is by definition unavailable to the
public, this idea rests on two outdated assumptions. In the first place,
in pre-modern libraries (monastic libraries, for example), printed
information was indeed rare enough that a library could endeavour to
collect *everything* (at least, everything written in a language the
monks could understand, everything not offensive to God, the church, or
the state, etc - even here, selection applied). But materially, and in
principle, collecting *everything* was in theory possible. In the second
place, with the advent of capitalism, the expansion of reading to poorer
classes, and the commodification of knowledge, libraries reconsidered
themselves as "free" (to taxpayers) portals to otherwise unaffordable or
inaccessible material. In that world - pre-internet, pre-globalization -
it was difficult to disseminate ideas. This process was gradually
getting easier, of course: the printing press helped, as did
newspapers, radio, and television, but while the *production* and
*dissemination* of content was made cheaper, easier, and faster,
*access* to such content lagged behind. Additionally, costs associated
with access to information (e.g. the cost of a television) remained
significant, and so
libraries were still able to position themselves as providers of free
access to (selected) material, and there was still a kernel of truth to
the idea that there was an obstacle to information access outside of
libraries.

This has all changed. The virtualization of information production, the
reduction of the myriad physical kinds of information to bytes, means
that most information is available through the same modality: images,
moving images, sound, text, all of this is available online. There is,
of course, a vast wealth of physical material not available online, just
as there continues to be a digital divide operating at many different
levels, but
when we are talking about people's voices - as Bowles' is - it has never
been cheaper, easier, or faster to get one's viewpoint out on the web,
and it has never been easier to get access to it. Indeed, libraries *do*
have a structural role in providing that access, as long as they allow
walk-in use of library computers (which they do for the time being,
though this too is currently under threat). Such access is a social
good, but it invalidates the argument that if libraries don't rent a
room to someone, providing a platform for them to speak, then that person effectively silenced.

(There is a deconstructionist argument to be made here regarding the
metaphysics of presence, but I'm not sufficiently well-versed in deconstruction to make that argument).

Ironically, then, the libraries themselves have made access to
everything online so easy that they undercut their own argument about
censorship. No-one but an IF-absolutist thinks that anyone is being
censored when there is no obstacle to their ideas finding an audience.
Meghan Murphy, who runs a website/blog, and clearly has no trouble
finding audiences, is not being silenced, her voice is not being "shut
down", if libraries don't rent space to her. All that happens is that
the trust the public holds in libraries - the trust they place precisely
in our *selectivity* and our evaluation of information - is leveraged by
corrosive perspectives. Again, the abstract ideal of "free speech"
confronts the reality of evaluation and selection: if libraries don't
evaluate and select the information they choose to showcase, then what is
the point of a library?

In fact, in a world where speech and its dissemination are effectively
free, the library's role as *evaluator* and *selector* becomes even more
crucial. The liberal view that arguments and opinions must only ever be
countered by other arguments and opinions ignores the material power
difference between speakers, a power difference libraries could choose
to rebalance, but only by giving up the classical liberal view that only
speech, ideas, argument *matter*. By effectively erasing material power,
oppression, harm, by making discourse only about ostensibly equal
(because immaterial) ideas, speech, and opinions, libraries are unable
to recognize real harm, real oppression, real inequality. This inability
leads them to abdicate their role as selector and evaluator, without
seeing that this simply allows the voices, ideas, and opinions of the
more powerful to exercise control and reproduce oppression.

By making the discourse about intellectual freedom, free speech, and
censorship, the libraries compel their critics to accept the terms of
the debate or risk appearing as champions of unfreedom, silencing, and
suppression.
This is another example of unnuanced, black and white, oversimplified
argument that classical liberalism, with its insistence on isolated,
unrelated, entities and concepts, supports. I suppose I should be
grateful that Chris Selley acknowledges "the library's doctrinaire,
classically liberal stance on speech", since - because liberalism is
the taken-for-granted common sense of bourgeois society - Chief
Librarians and other defenders of absolutist-IF never acknowledge it.

It is important to challenge the unquestioned common-sense of these
debates, whether that be the sudden elision of intellectual freedom with
free speech or the presumption of censorship. These debates are not
really about IF, and they definitely aren't about censorship. Rather,
they are about choosing political commitments in the recognition that
neutrality is an illusion. What Bowles can never seem to understand is
that there is no possibility of representing *every* perspective - not
in collections, not in room rentals - because social power, exclusion,
and oppression are real. By denying her own political commitments - or
by paying lip service to them, as she did in her Empire Club speech,
without understanding their contradictory consequences, Bowles' is
playing into the hands of right-wing antisocial exclusionary ideologies.
When comprehensive collection or platforming is impossible, evaluation
and selection are deeply and fundamentally political. This political
dimension is always present, and since the Chief
Librarians of many different systems have demonstrated that, far from remaining impartial, they have in fact chosen a side, they are going to have to live with the political
consequences.
