---
layout: post
title: Professionalism and Labour Aristocracy
date: 2020-09-15
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

I just read Emily Drabinski's [incisive
review](https://doi.org/10.18438/eblip29772) of Bundy and Wasserstein's
"Professionalism Reconsidered", a really useful re-evaluation of the understanding of librarians as professionals (has anything really changed?). Drabinski's conclusion, that transformation of the underlying social forces and relationships is necessary, is spot on, especially in the context of attacks on Canadian public librarianship (as hurting authors and the publishing industry), and defenses based on a "better" understanding of libraries' return on investment. 

>Attacks on librarianship must be met on a different terrain. We might instead conceive of disinvestment in higher education and the demands of capital that all units on campus generate profit as the problem. In this case, the solution to our always already impending demise lies not in transforming ourselves, but in transforming the social and economic formations that directly attack librarianship and so many other necessary social goods.

Since I'm still thinking about the question of
labour aristocracy from my [recent
post](https://redlibrarian.github.io/article/2020/09/13/boycott-strike-factory.html)
on the "Scholar's Strike", Drabinski's piece made me wonder to what extent
"professionalism" has come to mean precisely the aristocracy of labour.
Has "professional" lost the social and economic sense it had in the 18th
and 19th centuries, and now serves to mystify the fact that librarians are workers. In Althusser's terms, does "professionalism" interpellate us as non-workers? Does
"professional" now mean "labour aristocrat", allowing the privileged
echelon of workers to describe themselves in terms other than labour?

In classical political economy, the professions - clergy, lawyers,
doctors, etc - were considered unproductive, paid out of the share of
surplus value extracted either from agriculture (for the physiocrats) or
industrial workers (for later economists). In *The Accumulation of
Capital* (1913), Rosa Luxemburg describes the place of professionals in
capitalist society:

>Even under the sway of capitalism, society does not consist exclusively
>of capitalists and wage labourers. Apart from these two classes, there
>are a host of other people: the landowners, the salaried employees, the
>liberal professions such as doctors, lawyers, artists and scientists.
>Moreover, there is the Church and its servants, the Clergy, and finally
>the State with its officials and armed forces. All these strata of the
>population can be counted, strictly speaking, neither among the
>capitalist nor among the working class.

In this taxonomy, librarians would be considered not members of the
"liberal professions", but "salaried employees". This upper-echelon of
the working class - described by Engels and analyzed by Lenin in his
book on imperialism - are bribed by higher salaries and better working
conditions to become, in Lenin's words, "the principal social (not
military) prop of the bourgeoisie. For they are the real agents of the
bourgeoisie in the working-class movement, the labour lieutenants of the
capitalist class, real vehicles of reformism and chauvinism". The term
"professional" becomes in reality a euphemism for this social situation.

As the subsumption of labour has continued, however, even these social
strata have become proletarianized. Subsumption takes labour that was
previously not subject to surplus-value formation (i.e. was paid for by
the surplus value produced by workers, or by the "superprofits"
accruing to capital) and transforms even that labour into surplus-value
production. With that process comes all the pressures and tensions of
proletarian existence, which explains the rise in precarity among
previously "professional" categories: librarians, academics, doctors,
etc. As the labour aristocracy finds its aristocratic position more and
more wiped out, becomes more and more proletarianized, the "professional"
label does more and more ideological work, maintaining professionals as
the "labour lieutenants" of capital, even as their actual privilege
becomes more and more eroded. This is evident in the fact that precarity
produces a "reserve army" of professionals - an idea that would have
been completely contradictory to Engels and Lenin. The reserve army of
workers serves to drive down wages and working conditions, and the more
"professionals" become subject to this process the less of a labour
aristocracy they constitute.

"Professional", then, becomes less of an objective economic or
sociological category, and more of an ideological one. While Bundy and
Wasserman are correct, then, that librarians are not professionals in
the sense they define it, we are professionals in the sense that we are
"called to be" defined in that way (by LIS programs and our professional
associations). 

Drabinski notes the requirement for labour organizing:

>Indeed, as they say in the union movement, management is the best organizer: pulling together as workers around shared grievances and enemies in order to struggle for better wages and working conditions can cohere a group of individuals like little else. The authors stop short of advocating for unions for librarians. Like other institutions, they claim, union bureaucracy can be stultifying, “a reinforcement of the very rigid authority structure of libraries which serves now as an impediment to innovation and furtherance of service commitments” (p. 24). In many cases, professional librarians still see unions this way: mechanisms for the production of staff and the rules that govern them that hobble the innovations a more “entrepreneurial” workforce would otherwise produce

The professional label, indeed the "endless" arguments over our
professional status serves as an ideological drag on the kind of
organization Drabinski advocates. But where Bundy and Wasserman see
collective bargaining as a way of achieving professionalization, this
strategy risks being recuperated in the logic of the aristocracy of
labour. Labour organizing can't result in a solidification of the
divisions between labour aristocracy and other workers. Precarity and
proletarianization are already here for "professionals", and any large
scale organization has to be based, as Drabinski says, on "pulling
together as workers around shared grievances and enemies". If we take
the theory of labour aristocracy seriously (and it is contested even
within Marxism), then we have to recognize that "professionalism" itself
is an obstacle to that kind of solidarity. There's a lot of ideological
work that needs to be done (in older Marxist terms we would speak here
of "class consciousness") in order to overcome the obstacle posed by
professionalism to solidarity and organization.
