---
layout: post
title: Facts and Constructions
date: 2020-01-16
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Science is often claimed as the triumph of materialism over idealism,
superstition, opinion, etc. For a long time, science was considered to
be nothing more than the straightforward, progressive uncovering of
facts. Newton famously wrote that he "made no hypotheses" (*hypotheses
non fingo*), he simply
observed and explained. This model of science found it difficult to
account for fundamental changes in worldview (e.g. the Copernican
revolution) and was thrown into crisis by the shift from Newtonian to
Relativistic physics. This crisis produced new ways of thinking about
science itself, and the arguments and debates of Popper, Kuhn,
Lakatos, and Feyerabend (among others) make fascinating reading - but
the main outcome of this development in the philosophy of science was
the recognition that science is never *purely* empirical and deductive;
it is at least in part a) social and b) probabilistic. What this means
is that there are never settled material facts or realities in science;
everything is subject to revision. Put another way, there is always a
gap between the material universe (what Bhaskar calls the real) and what
we know about the world (the empirical). Philosophers differ as to
whether this gap can be bridged or not, but very few philosophers of
science hold to a view of empirical knowledge as an unmediated
relationship to material reality.

The misguided reliance on a pre-relativistic Epicurean distinction
between the material and social worlds lies at the heart of "The
Decolonized Librarian's" recent blog post on ["Gender, Intellectual
Freedom, and Public Policy: Framing the Action: Boundaries and
Rules"](https://decolonizedlibrarian.wordpress.com/2020/01/13/gender-intellectual-freedom-and-public-policy-pt-7-framing-the-action-boundaries-and-rules/).
This is the seventh - and concluding - part of a long essay written in
response to the events surrounding transphobic speakers at Vancouver and
Toronto Public Libraries (and now at Seattle Public Library), the
doubling down on the absolute priority of "intellectual freedom" over
other values by library administrations, and the serious divide within
the profession over all these things. My friend Jane Schmidt has started
the [#timetotalkaboutIF
campaign](https://incidentalacademic.wordpress.com/2020/01/13/timetotalkaboutif-campaign/)
in an attempt to counter the hegemony of intellectual freedom absolutism
at our conferences and in our organization.

Amongst the various "rules" set out by "The Decolonized Librarian" (and
readers of this blog will know how I feel about rules and deontological
ethics) is the following:

>One’s ideation of self and gender expression should not preclude an open acknowledgement of the material reality of our sexed bodies in terms of our lived experience and how we are treated by society.

This "rule" adheres to an out of date understanding of the ways in which
we understand, know, and relate to "the material world". The gap
between reality and knowledge is such that there is no "material
reality" that is not socially constructed and socially understood and that is not subject to ichallenge and revision. Recent scientific
work has called into question the settled understanding of the "material
realities" of "sexed bodies". But more than that, it is dangerous to
settled on a fixed "material reality" as the foundation of an ethical,
political, or policy position. The "material reality" of skull size and
shape formed the basis of the discredited pseudoscience of phrenology;
the "material reality" of racial inferiority underpinned (and still
underpins) the racism of colonial violence; the "material reality" of
the primacy of procreation is used to justify homophobia;the "material reality" of
difference continues to support bias and discrimination towards disabled
people;  the "material reality" of capitalist economics justifies the
state violence currently being meted out at the Wet’suwet’en blockade.
Any reliance on a settled "material reality" can only be at best
conservative and at worst supports, justifies, and maintains hidden or
open structures of oppression, domination, and violence. The "material
reality" used to justify transphobia is the latest in a long line of
such justifications.

In part 6 of the essay series, The "Decolonized Librarian" - which
appears less and less an appropriate moniker - states that:

>More broadly, since free speech and intellectual freedom lie at the heart of the ethics of librarianship, the widespread refusal to warrant these as relevant seems to me to be highly reckless.

The idea that "free speech and intellectual freedom lie at the heart of
the ethics of librarianship" is presented as yet another settled,
unquestionable, unchallenged fact, a "material reality". And yet, as
both the history of the profession and its current state show, this is
far from being the case: not only do many librarians challenge the idea
that IF *and nothing else* should lie at the heart of the profession,
but the historical record shows that free speech and IF *never* occupied
such a position. What *in fact* lies at the heart of the profession, and
what many of us would like to see replaced, is a liberal justification
for colonial, capitalist, and state violence, hierarchy,
authoritarianism, patriarchy, and - ironically, unfortunately - the
ignorance on which capitalism relies. One of the main tools in the
maintenance of such ignorance, as Marx argued time and again, is
mistaking social constructtions for unchanging natural law. This runs
counter to "The Decolonized Librarian's" characterization of the
importance of Epicureanism. But we have to ask ourselves which positions
lends itself more to equality and social justice. My own view is that
the Marxist tendency towards a radical recognition of the *social* and
*political* elements in every so-called "material reality" gets us
further down that road.

Finally, the theory of a "material reality" can always be used to
justify an abstraction over lived experience, because the gap between
reality and our knowledge of it means that "material reality" is always
already an abstraction. As I've written before, it is these abstractions
that obscure the *social* and *political* realities we are trying to
deal with, and the lives of people we are trying to support.

The thing for me is that for those of us who remember the virulent,
unquestioned homophobia of, say, the 1980s, and who see the (still
incomplete) gains won by gay rights activists, and the adjustment of
what used to be claimed as the "material reality" of perversion, etc;
those of us who remember *with shame* the unquestioned and
unchallengeable bigotry and cruelty of those years - especially growing
up in a relatively conservative prairie city - should be familiar with
the ways in which transphobia tries to protect itself, justify itself,
maintain itself. How many people have to die before we collectively
adjust the "material reality" (i.e. our own prejudices) to make life
better for the most vulnerable among us?
