---
layout: post
title: Acceptable Inequalities
date: 2020-10-22
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

I've been trying to understand how the room-rental to transphobic
speakers at Toronto Public Library and the "airport-style" security
implemented at Winnipeg Public Library are connected, first to each
other, and then to the dominant conception of intellectual freedom. This
blog post is a "thinking aloud" about one way to understand the
connection.

The TPL controversy was explicitly framed around intellectual freedom:
the Charter right of freedom of expression had to be universally and
equally applied as an aspect of democracy protected and sustained by
libraries. On the other hand, intellectual freedom was not (that I know
of) explicitly applied to the Winnipeg case in any concentrated way.
There were some comments about the restriction of intellectual freedom
to any user who was prevented or discouraged from entering the library
due to the security measures, but most of the challenges to the policy
focused on the fact of exclusion itself.

The way I think these two events are connected is in the way they play
with the idea of "acceptable inequality" within the context of "liberal
egalitarianism", the form of liberal political philosophy derived from
John Rawls' *Theory of Justice*. For Rawls, "justice as fairness" is
composed of two principles. 

1) The principle of equality of opportunity. This posits the universal
and equal application of rights, regardless of social position (i.e.
class, identity, wealth, privilege, etc). This is the "colour blind"
egalitarianism of Rawls' position. For Rawls, this principle means that
"assuming that there is a distribution of natural assets, those who are
at the same level of talen and ability, and have the same willingness to
use them, should have the same prospects of success regardless of their
initial place in the social system". From a critical perspective, this
principle ignores or erases structures of oppression and inequality (and
indeed, this principle is used to deny the existence of such structures
in real politics). A charitable interpretation would argue that by this
principle Rawls is seeking to overcome or circumvent such structures.

The first princple is balanced by a second:

2) The difference principle. In a social system defined by equality of
opportunity, *some* inequality is justified *if and only if* it benefits
the least advantaged members of society. Rawls illustrates this principle
in a few different ways, but perhaps a good example is that of
trickle-down economics, where the justification is that increased wealth
at the top flows down to those at the bottom, and "a rising tide raises
all boats". Again, in real politics and economics, this principle is
often used to justify and support an unequal and exploitative status
quo. 

What is important here is that the first principle giveth (absolute
universal equality) and the second princple taketh away. The idea of an
acceptable departure from universal equality is often deployed in
political theories derived from Rawls, but often with different
criteria. Charles Taylor, for example, in his work on the politics of
recognition, argues that the difference principle can be applied to
cultural differences (universal equality except where it would lead to
misrecognition of individuals) and James Tully applies it to culturally
diverse polities (universal equality except in the right to
self-determination of ethnic or cultural minorities).

In practice, what I think happens is that the difference principle
becomes a kind of catch all or get-out-of-jail-free card, to be used to
enforce or circumvent the universal application of equal rights for political
purposes. 

In the TPL case, absolute universal application of the Charter right to
freedom of expression was applied, with no recognition of the difference
principle, which would have allowed TPL to reject the room-rental
because that would have been to the advantage of transgender people.
(Similarly, at the infamous TPL board meeting, the letter but not the
spirit of Taylor's "politics of
recognition" was adhered to.) In
the WPL case, the difference principle *was* applied in the sense that
inquality of access to the library was justified in the name of
increased safety for library workers. The denial of structural
inequalities and oppression made possible by Rawls' first principle
allows for the non-recognition of marginalized people as disadvantaged.

I've argued on this blog - and I know others have as well - that one of
the problems with absolutist IF is that it is used to trump (and I use
the word advisedly) all other values. I think the political tactic is a
little more subtle than that: what library leaders and policy makers do
(probably unconciously, given the hegemonic position of liberal
philosophy) is to implicitly frame their policy decisions according to one or the
other of Rawls' two principles of justice. Intellectual Freedom happens
to be one of the values that lends itself to reliance on the principle
of equality, while other values (security, confidentiality, etc) are
deployed in order to leverage the difference principle. 

Once we see things in that light, we can actually apply them to many
library and library-adjacent decisions. Unwillingness to support BIPOC
library workers is justified by reference to the principle of equality;
lack of collegiality in decision making to the difference principle.
Unfortunately, what Rawls saw as a normative way of creating the
conditions for a just society are too easily recuperated for the
purposes of the exercise of traditional (class, race, and gender-based)
power. Perhaps unfortunately is the wrong word, if we understand liberal
political philosophy as having been developed precisely to ensure the
continued functioning of that power.
