---
layout: post
title: Lives, Time, and the Pandemic
date: 2020-05-15
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

"When a seller has no choice about selling, it should be called pillage,
not purchase." Cicero.

In *Confronting the Democratic Discourse*, I argued that two of the main
precepts of liberal-democratic thinking librarianship are: that lives
are protected, and that there is all the time in the world for debate
and deliberation. I pointed to the very real lives being lost (Black
lives, trans lives) and the time limits imposed by climate change as
fundamental challenges to this hegemonic, liberal way of thinking. If we
want to achieve something other than the status quo, we need to take the
loss of lives and the lack of time seriously.

All that was before the global pandemic put both lives and time squarely
at the forefront of political questions: how to reduce the number of
lives lost, political debates over length of life and quality of life
(typically hijacked by rightwingers who are only to happy to sacrifice
other people - old people, disabled people - if only to regain time for
profit), how *soon* can the economy "reopen" and things "return to
normal", by which is meant, of course, the profitable exploitation, the
wilful destruction of lives and the planet, that marks capitalism in the
current conjuncture.

At the beginning of the pandemic, we saw calls to *close the libraries*
quickly, while various municipalities and universities wanted to keep
them open longer, prepared to trade lives for time. In this, we saw the
dreadful equation of expendable, precarious lives to the kind of
turnover or reproduction time Marx discusses in volume 2 of *Capital*.
For those of us able to work from home, time became fraught: how to
distinguish between worktime and non-worktime - a problem exposed by
autonomist and feminist Marxists long ago, but now returning with a
vengeance, along with the the very question of gender-based
"productivity" that Federici, for example, showed was a product of
capitalist violence (as primitive accumulation) dating back to the end
of the Middle Ages. Quality of life became a vexed question as time took
on new weight and new shadows. Housework and childcare - the loss of
time and the production of life - became once again a nexus of gendered
power.

For those who had to go to work, marked out as "essential" and
recognized with applause and empty compliments but no protection, the question of their
lives versus their labour-time was brought once again to the surface. In
the municipalities and universities, "unproductive time" led - as it
always leads - to painful discipline of the workers, the insistence that
their lives have no meaning, their time is worthless, if they are not
working for their employer. The euphemistic "temporary layoffs" brought
the question of working lives and working time together as the absence
of both. The forced layoffs in Alberta and Manitoba served only the
purpose of discipline, ensuring that workers understood that their lives
are valuable only so long as their time is devoted to labour.

Capital, faced with an overabundance of lives (workers) and
(unproductive) time, does what it always does: sheds its surplus labour
power, making it a problem of the state, while working frantically to
regain some of that lost productive time. The ghoulish calls for
reopening of the economy while lives in the thousands continue to be
lost daily, is nothing new, is no surprise. It is the Standard Operating
Procedure of capital in crisis.

Now that we are on the brink of reopening, as libraries want to be the
first to "serve their customers", the question of the lives of library
workers and the time "lost" to closure becomes once more the target of
the pragmatic, practical thinking of library leadership. The pragmatic
calculus is based on once again equating lifetime with working time, but
with a third term now becoming more and more insistent: the time of the
user. Users clamouring for their own time to pass more quickly or more
productively through
access to library resources, books, games, newspapers, databases,
research material. Ranganathan's fourth law - save the time of the
reader - takes on a tense and eerie complexion as we rush (time) to put
library workers (lives) back in jeopardy in order to improve the time of
our users, at the same time potentially contributing - in a cycle no
less vicious for being obvious - to a second outbreak and the loss of
more lives and the waste of more time.

And of course, this depends on users' evaluation of their own lives and
lives of the other members of their community. Abled users who
underestimate the risk are prepared to risk the lives of disabled users,
immunocompromised users. Should we take our users' clamouring at their
word? Faced with such a choice, libraries often fall back on "give 'em
what they want", but in times like these such a conception of choice and
service is unethical.

Reopening libraries means understanding psychologies of our various
constituencies, their over- or underestimation of risk to themselves and
to the community,  the quarantine time of returned
books, it means understanding the choices people are making about their
lives. Libraries hate to *judge*, to *decide*, to *choose*. But
judgement, decision, and choice is what is called for here. Not the
usual abdication of responsibility to the law or to our parent
institutions. We have to be able to challenge "give 'em what they want"
if that is the responsible and prudent move. 

By moving too fast (saving time) by being practical and pragmatic
as always, by falling for the old canard that "the customer is always
right", I worry that we are going to lose more of both lives and time.
At the beginning of the pandemic lockdown, there was talk of things
slowing down, but slowness is antithetical to the turnover requirements
of capital, and as institutions of social and cultural reproduction,
libraries must also subscribe to the privileging of speed, the feeling
that one is alive simply because one is moving so fast. 
