---
layout: post
title: Rifts and Divisions
date: 2020-02-21
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

Antonio Gramsci has long been a critical darling in LIS, in part because
his philosophy - stripped of its revolutionary power - is easily
assimilatable to the profession's unacknowledged liberalism. He adds a
touch of red spice to an otherwise bland and unpalatable porridge of
political commitments. Stephen Bales' "counterhegemonic academic librarian" owes a debt to
Gramsci, as does Toni Samek's work on the history of social
responsibility debates in the ALA, and Douglas Raber's work on hegemony
and intellectual freedom. That there *is* a hegemonic discourse of LIS
is probably uncontroversial. What I want to get at in this post is just
how clear the division is between hegemonic LIS positions, as well as
the way in which a liberalized Gramsci allows dominant voices in the
profession to ignore the second half of Gramsci's famous image of the
centaur, the use of force or coercion as a necessary complement to
leadership or hegemony.

The recent events around transphobic speakers at Toronto, Vancouver, and
Seattle Public Libraries have exposed a deep rift within the profession.
I used to see the main division within the profession as between
academics and practitioners (the split at the Congress of the Social
Sciences and the Humanities between CAIS and CAPAL is indicative of this
divide), but that is overly simplistic and potentially leads to an
unwarranted opposition between theory and practice. It is tempting to see this rift as generational, but the edges are too
rough and undefined for that. It is equally tempting to see the
divisions as indicating a rift between "mainstream" and "critical"
librarianship (those "woke cool kids" who don't know their place in
polite discourse). It is probably closer to the mark to argue that
divisions are between hegemonic positions - intellectual/academic,
managerial, or both - and challengers to hegemony (from whatever
perspective). Additionally, my own research interests suggest a split
between the constituted power of the profession (in both our
organizations and the academy) and the constituent power of library
workers.

In the Prison Notebooks, Gramsci quotes Machiavelli on the two ways of
fighting, "by law or by force":

>The first way is natural to men, and the second to beasts. But as the
>first way often proves inadequate one must needs have recourse to the
>second. So a prince must understand how to make a use of the beast
>and the man. The ancient writers taught princes about this by an
>allegory, when they described how Achilles and many other princes of
>the ancient world were sent to be brought up by Chiron, the centaur, so
>that he might train them his way. All the allegory means, in making the
>teacher half beast and half man, is that a prince must know how to act
>according to the nature of both, and that he cannot survive otherwise.
>(Machiavelli, The Prince).

For Gramsci, hegemony/leadership was only half of the the method of
rule: coercion or force was always held at the ready. We can see this in
the Wet'suwet'en pipeline protests and supporting blockades: for the
Canadian establishment "rule of law" must always be backed up with RCMP
violence. Hegemony and leadership shade indiscriminately into coercion
and force. In terms of Negri's theory of constituent power, both
hegemony and coercion are ways in which constituted power forecloses the
direct, living productivity of the multitude.

In practical terms we can see this in the discourse around rights, free
speech, intellectual freedom and democracy deployed by Vickery Bowles in
her defense of TPL's room rental... right up until the moment the police
are called in to a library branch and community protesters kettled
inside. Hegemony and force, leadership and coercion, both in support of
the same thing: the constituted power of the state and its
representatives.

In the academy, it is perhaps less easy to see the coercive element of
constituted power, but it is all the easier to recognize the hegemony of
mainstream LIS thinking. A just published book on "libraries and
archives" now, *Minds Alive*, edited by Patricia Demers and Toni Samek
(U of T Press), is a good example of a mainstream or hegemonic volume of
LIS research and perspectives. In the introduction, Demers and Samek
note that "Libraries and archives, at once public institutions providing
both communal and private havens of discovery, are being repurposed and
transformed in intercultural contexts" (3). The role of the book is then
to to help "understand and pursue the ethical dimensions of these
transformed theatres of communicative discourse" (3). As someone
relatively active on the "critlib" side of LIS research, I would argue
that the changing nature of libraries and archives lies very close to
the heart of critical librarianship: how have libraries and archives
changed, and just as importantly how have they remained the same (in
terms of institutions implicated in structures of domination organized
around class, race, gender, sexuality, disability, etc). In a book
published in 2020 about "libraries and archives now" I would expect to
see some reference to recent critical library literature. Off the top of
my head, I would probably name:

- Fobazi Ettarh's "Vocational Awe and Librarianship: Lies we tell
ourselves".
- Karen Nicholson's "The McDonaldization of Academic Libraries and the
  Values of Transformational Change". 
- David James Hudson's "The Whiteness of Practicality".
- Gina Schlesselman-Tarango's "The Legacy of Lady Bountiful: White Women
  in the Library".

These are four papers chosen fairly quickly from among a large body of
work that has become foundational, I would say, for critical librarian
discussions. I probably wouldn't necessarily expect them *all* to
appear, that might be hoping too much, but it is troubling that *none*
of them do. None of them is so recent that they would be overlooked by
scholarship appearing in 2020. None of them are cited in *Minds Alive*.
The only scholar I can see in the references who I would consider at
least adjacent to critlib is Donna Lanclos. On the other hand, John Buschman, Jesse Shera,
Nancy Kranich, Gloria Leckie... these names are prominent throughout
the work.

A good indication of the ways in which this body of knowledge and
research is hegemonic is, as Maureen Babb pointed out, how those of us
writing from a "critlib" position *have* to engage with the "mainstream"
literature, but the mainstream never has to engage with us. In this way,
the *ideas* contained within hegemonic works appear unchallenged and
unchallengeable, thereby reproducing themselves from generation to
generation of library workers.

What kind of ideas? How about:

"Libraries make us, their users, feel safe also. We all have our
favourite places to sit in the library - the desk by the window, the
desk by the radiator, the desk cocooned by bookshelves. Author Miriam
Toews told Ali Smith about the day she sat at work in a Toronto public
library and saw her own mother come in, settle herself in a sunlit
window and fall asleep." (Crawford, p. 20).

An engagement not only with vocational awe, but also with the reality of
Canadian public libraries (no-sleeping policies in Edmonton, draconian
security in Winnipeg, transphobic speakers in Toronto) would have
challenged and problematized this notion that libraries are valued
because of "the safety they promise for ourselves and for the things we
value in our culture" (21). The racial and classist underpinnings of
this conception of the library are ignored, precisely due to the
hegemonic nature of this kind of LIS research.

One more example:

"The public library is a place that provides free access to diverse
kinds and formats of information to all. It is a public place where
people can acquire and refine competencies and skills. It is a public
place where culture is displayed, preserved, and promoted. It thereby
helps strengthen democratic principles and practices including freedom
of information and the press, in addition to freedom of speech and
assembly." (Kosciejew, p. 35). It is significant that this paragraph,
like others in a similar vein, does not cite anything. This perspective
is so dominant within the profession that it can be presented as an
absolute truism. And this despite the presence of critical voices
challenging just such a conception for decades, let alone the more
recent resurgence of critlib.

It's no wonder, then, that *faced* with challenges from inside and
outside the profession, the CEOs of public libraries in Canada can do
nothing but retreat behind the comfort of liberal platitudes (democracy!
freeze peach! censorship!) without being able to articulate a compelling
response. These CEOs are steeped in the hegemonic discourse of
librarianship, though as we know they are not averse to deploying
coercion as well. When hegemony and leadership fails, the response is
not - as the adherents of John Stuart Mill or Habermas would like us to
believe - to adjust ideas and take better arguments under consideration.
It is rather, on the one hand, to ignore other voices, different
arguments and, in the last analysis, to call in the big guns to restore
law and order. What we see with the Wet'suwet'en is the playbook for
the defense of constituted power in any context.
