---
layout: post
title: Precarity and Tenure
date: 2020-02-29
categories: article
tags: featured
image: /assets/images/mandolin.jpg
---

In an article I wrote for [*Library
Trends*](https://muse.jhu.edu/article/746744) ([open access preprint link](https://doi.org/10.7939/r3-28xg-jk65)), I argued that neoliberalism should in large part be understood as a process of restructuring of labour in order to increase profits and (just as importantly) make sure those profits fall into the right hands. Neoliberalism was a reaction against the post-war welfare state situation in which, following the Second World War, a tacit compromise was reached, an agreement for capital to share a portion of its profits in exchange for peace on the labour front. By the late 1960s, capital was frustrated with this situation and sought ways to recapture the share of profit flowing to labour [^1]. For people who grew up in this period - let's call them "boomers" - the post-war compromise, the institutions of the welfare state, and the unspoken truce between labour and capital are sacrosanct. When I was younger, arguing politics with my dad, he found it unimaginable that capital would renege on the post-war compromise, for fear of the reaction of labour. One of the achievements of neoliberal restructuring is that it managed - for a time - to defang labour by replacing collective responsibility with self-entrepreneurship, by convincing individual workers that *they alone* and not the welfare state or society were responsible for their own wellbeing (in all senses) and, perhaps most insidiously, convincing some workers - the aristocracy of labour - that they were not even workers at all.

Into this last camp fall tenured academics. The university as an
institution has long been considered sacrosanct (i.e. not subject to
capitalist restructuring) because of its lengthy history as an
institution of social order and the production of subjectivities (i.e.
because it is an institution of the ruling class), but also because it
fit the ideology of the welfare state for universal education,
managerial training, etc, etc. Additionally, during the first phase of
neoliberal restructuring (roughly from the 1970s through the 1990s),
universities acted as job sponges, keeping workers out of the job market
for longer and longer periods of time (i.e. degree creep) while capital
was in the process of removing worker protections and making precarious
the weakest and most vulnerable segments of workers.

While capital's attention was on these segments, academics could
consider themselves - and here we see again the power of ideology - as
non-workers, and the universities as not subject to capitalist
restructuring. When the neoliberalization of the universities began in
earnest in the late 1990s, in other words, when the academy began to be
subject to the same processes of subsumption as the rest of the economy,
it took academics by surprise. Because boomer academics did not see themselves
as workers, they believed that a) the university as welfare-state
institution was untouchable and b) that they could rely on deference to
their own wisdom and knowledge to correct decisions by capital and the
state. Those who live by the word die by the word.

Labour disputes within universities are, of course, not new; but they
have so far  managed to remain within the bounds of welfare state conceptions of education, labour, capital, etc. This is all changing now.

As the precaritization of academic work has proceeded (encompassing
adjuncts, casual staff, teaching staff, outsourcing of "support staff"
roles), the academic aristocracy of labour continued to close ranks,
relying on its own untouchabiliity as defense against the predations of
capital. We saw this in the Event which led to the creation of the
McMaster University Academic Librarians' Association. One is reminded of
Niem&ouml;ller's famous "First they came for the Communists..."

It turns out that all capital was waiting for to finalize the operation
of proletarianizing the entire academy was an indication from a
government that it was willing to ignore the history of universities,
the welfare-state sanctity of the institution, indeed the welfare
state's conception of the importance of public education as such. In
the new conservative government of Alberta it has found such an
indication. The University of Calgary laid off 19
library workers before Christmas, and the Southern Alberta Institute of Technology has just announced the abolition
of 230 position leading to 150 layoffs. University of Alberta has
been notified that its 2019 budget has been cut by 18% for 2020, with at
least two more years of budget cuts coming. The university administration
has explicitly stated that this will lead to massive layoffs.

Academics as the aristocracy of labour have long believed tenure would
protect them from layoffs, once again because tenure predates
neoliberalism and bears all the ideological privilege of a different
socio-economic conjuncture. I suspect we are about to see how little
tenure counts against the need of capital to maximize its profits and
to reduce all segments of labour to a disciplined mass. In a way, in
terms of class consciousness, this is perhaps not a bad thing: academics
shorn of the protection of tenure, made as precarious as the rest of the
working population, will perhaps no longer be able to see themselves as
non-workers. Perhaps I'm being naive; ideology is a hell of a drug.

Our unions may be some protection, but Canadian unions are often built
especially to allow for divide-and-conquer. The seven constituencies in
the University of Alberta academic association will likely be set at
each other's throats. Some of these constituencies have tenure, some do
not; faculty are by far the largest constituency, librarians are by far
the smallest. But we have to remember that unions, too, were
incorporated into the
post-war compromise, and form a structural part of the relations of
capital today. They understand their role as managing the capital-labour
relationship, rather than as actively antagonistic to the power of
labour (except in specific and extreme circumstances). Canadian labour
law prevents much in the way of antagonistic action, though we can learn
a lot from the solidarity shown the Wet'suwet'en by First Nations across
the country. Indeed, we ought to be actively seeking mutual support with
Indigenous land defenders and climate change activists, as well as
workers in other sectors, like nurses,
teachers in Ontario and Alberta, indeed, all workers and marginalized
people across the country. This would require, of course, not only
overcoming the ideology of the aristocracy of labour, but
settler-consciousness, racism, and climate change denial. A tall order
for sure.

But ideology is strong. It is unlikely that academics will recognize
that collegial governance, like reconciliation, was never really in
play, but was always simply an ideological means to retain order. When
that order fails, as we are seeing right now with confrontations in
Tyendinaga echoing confrontations at Kanehsatake thirty years ago, the
naked power of capital and the state is exposed in the form of the
police.

I don't know, then, what the best strategy is to achieve the solidarity
we need. I do know that knowledge, explanation, and better arguments are
useless. The common refrain "doesn't the government realize what these
cuts are doing to universities? don't they know what effect this will
have on education?" is pointless. They absolutely know; the hardest
thing for those who still believe in the sanctity of the welfare state
is to understand that *they don't care*. AI offers capital the possibility of
(finally) extricating itself from relying on increasingly
better-educated workers (see Eagleton's *Literary Theory* and Ursula
Huws' *Labor in the Global Digital Economy* for accounts of this
reliance). This possibility is probably spurious, but capital never
looks a gift horse in the mouth. Education is not the valuable asset it
was under the welfare state, or even in the first phase of
neoliberalisation. Indeed, my own experience of going to university in
the 1990s was that even then the last thing you received at a university
was an education. It is no wonder that they have become sites of
labour-capital antagonism despite the best intentions of academics
themselves. The only wonder is what took so long (ideology and
privilege again).

Time will tell how the situation in Alberta will play out. But it is
impossible that other governments around the world, still at least
partly bound by allegiance to welfare state rhetoric and ideology, are
not watching the situation carefully, poised to follow suit as the profit to be made destroying universities and public education
becomes worth the social cost.

[^1]: I should point out that autonomists like Antonio Negri see this process differently: that it was agitation on the part of labour under the welfare state that provoked capital into neoliberal restructuring.

Correction: I made a mistake in the information about Alberta layoffs.
The changes can be seen
[here](https://github.com/redlibrarian/redlibrarian.github.io/commit/a2fc96032b1139d7b39040fa49f7fd42edf5b681)
